THE CODE OF THE CITY OF HARLEM, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
HARLEM OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Roxanne Whitaker 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Thigpen 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Danny Bellavance 
Jennifer Bennett 
Gregg Stokes 
City Council 
____________ 
C. Brett Cook 
City Manager 
____________ 
Barry Fleming 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Harlem, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2004 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Mollie M. Garrett, Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Brett Cook for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Harlem, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Harlem, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Harlem, Georgia, 2018. 
PART I - CITY CHARTER[1] 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 473), page 3654. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the City of Harlem, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The corporate boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the City of Harlem shall be shown on a map or a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of city manager and to be designated as the "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Harlem, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city manager shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Corporate powers. 
(a)  Animal Regulations. To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(b)  Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(c)  Building Regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(d)  Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(e)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(f)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(g)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(h)  Environmental Protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment. 
(i)  Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(j)  Garbage Fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(k)  General Health, Safety, and Welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(l)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(m)  Health and Sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(n)  Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(o)  Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(p)  Municipal Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(q)  Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(r)  Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(s)  Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(t)  Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(u)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(v)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(w)  Planning and Zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(x)  Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency. 
(y)  Public Hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(z)  Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(aa)  Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(bb)  Public Transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(cc)  Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(dd)  Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(ee)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city. 
(ff)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(gg)  Sewer Fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payments of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(hh)  Solid Waste Disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items. 
(ii)  Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores to certain areas. 
(jj)  Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(kk)  Taxes: Ad Valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(ll)  Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(mm)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(nn)  Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(oo)  Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. The council shall be composed of four members elected by the voters of the city at large in accordance with provisions of Article V of this Charter. The mayor shall be elected as provided in Section 2.32 of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall be elected at large and shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor and councilmember unless that person is at least 21 years of age and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election as mayor or members of the council; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; temporary vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall exist if the mayor or councilmember resigns, dies, moves his or her residence from the city, or is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the governing authority, except if granted a leave of absence by the city council, which leave shall be entered upon the journal; or if he or she is adjudged incompetent or is convicted of malfeasance in office, or of a felony, or any violation of election laws. The city council shall appoint a qualified person to fill any such vacancy in the office of councilmember for the remainder of the unexpired term. At no time shall there be more than one councilmember so appointed holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the city council with one member so appointed on the city council, a special election shall be held within a period of 45 days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter; however, if a special election is called pursuant to this Charter, the vacancy previously filled by appointment as well as the existing vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired terms in a special election. Provided, however, if a regular election for the city shall be held within three months after the second vacancy occurs, such second vacancy shall not be filled by appointment but the first vacancy previously filled by appointment and the second vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired terms at such regular election. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the mayor, the vacancy shall be filled pursuant to Sections 2.32 and 5.14 of this Charter. If a special election is called, such election shall be held in the manner prescribed by Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(c)  Temporary Vacancies. The provisions of this section shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of Interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of Public Property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in his or her capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Contracts Voidable and Rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of Elected Official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall be employed by the City of Harlem or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall be employed by the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. All municipal terms of office shall be for four-year terms and expire the second Monday of January after an election. There shall be no prohibition against former mayors or councilmembers serving voluntarily on appointed boards, commissions, or authorities after the end of their term of office. 
(g)  Political Activities of Certain Officers and Employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying for or election to any public office in the city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for Violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-HR1, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Harlem and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting no later than the third Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor or city manager and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths and shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor)(councilmember) of the city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. 
"I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of the City of Harlem for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal Charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Harlem to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or mayor pro tempore and two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committee and committee chairs and officers of the city council shall be recommended by the mayor and appointed by a vote of the city council. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Three councilmembers or the mayor and two councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the city council for official action except when such councilmember has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question. 
(2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 215), page 3743, § 1) 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Harlem and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city manager shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  (1)  Every ordinance adopted by the councilmembers shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor after its adoption. 
(2)  The mayor, within five calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall be come law at 12:00 noon on the fifth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the councilmembers through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(3)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the councilmembers at their next meeting. If the councilmembers then or at any subsequent meeting within the next 30 days adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of three councilmembers, it shall become law. 
(4)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the councilmembers over the mayor's veto as provided in this subsection. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the councilmembers as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the councilmembers as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection. 
(2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 215), page 3743, § 2) 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by the city clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Harlem, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the city council. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
In the event the office of city manager is vacant, the mayor and city council shall appoint an acting city manager. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The responsibilities, powers, and duties of the city manager shall be set forth in an ordinance adopted by city council. 
Sec. 2.31. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. This section shall not apply in an emergency situation. The emergency powers of the city council shall be set forth in an ordinance approved by city council. 
Sec. 2.32. - Selection of mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
At each general election the voters of the city shall elect a mayor, subject to the provisions of Section 5.13 of this Charter, for a term of four years. The city council shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, but shall only vote once on matters before the city council. If a vacancy occurs with more than 12 months remaining in the vacating mayor's term of office, the mayor pro tempore shall become the interim mayor until a special election is held pursuant to Section 5.14 of this Charter. If the term of office is 12 months or less, the mayor pro tempore shall fill out this term. 
Sec. 2.33. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Be counted toward the constitution of a quorum if only two councilmembers are present; 
(6)  Vote on matters coming before the city council in the case of a tie vote among the members of the city council; and 
(7)  Have the right to veto matters passed by the city council as provided in subsection (c) of Section 2.22. 
(2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 215), page 3743, § 3) 
Sec. 2.34. - Position of mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this Charter. When acting as mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote as a member of the council. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors and department heads of the city shall be appointed by the city manager solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All directors and department heads shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance or resolution. 
(d)  There shall be a director or a head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director or department head shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
(e)  All directors and department heads under the supervision of the city manager shall be appointed by the city manager. All appointed directors and department heads shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney with confirmation together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager with confirmation of city council shall appoint a city clerk. The city clerk shall maintain city council records required by this Charter and shall maintain the city seal. 
Duties of the city clerk shall be set forth by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Harlem. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Columbia County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, there shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers serving on April 1, 2008, shall serve out their terms and until their successors have been elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2008, an election shall be held for the two councilmembers whose terms of office expire the following January. The two candidates for the office of councilmember elected pursuant to Section 5.13 of this Charter shall be elected for initial terms of office of three years each and for terms of four years each thereafter and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 2010, an election shall be held for the two councilmembers and the mayor whose terms of office expire the following January. The two candidates for the office of councilmember and the candidate for the office of mayor elected pursuant to Section 5.13 of this Charter shall be elected for initial terms of office of three years each and for terms of four years each thereafter and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for the office of councilmember shall be elected. The candidate receiving the most votes, provided that such person receives at least 40 percent of the votes for the office of mayor shall be elected. If no candidate receives at least 40 percent of the votes cast, there shall be a run-off election between the two candidates receiving the two highest number of votes. Such run-off election shall be conducted pursuant to Code Section 21-2-501 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor pro tempore shall serve for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this paragraph shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Columbia County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Columbia County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Harlem. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within the city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the city at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Operating budget procedures shall be set forth by an ordinance adopted by city council. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
Action by the city council on the budget shall be set forth by an ordinance adopted by the city council. 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, special, or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by resolution the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 31st day of December of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title. 
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as "The Code of the City of Harlem, Georgia," for which designation "Code of Ordinances," "codified ordinances" or "Code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Code. 
(Code 2004, § 10.01) 
Sec. 1-2. - Interpretation. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law. 
(Code 2004, § 10.02) 
Sec. 1-3. - Application to future ordinances. 
All provisions of ths chapter compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 2004, § 10.03) 
Sec. 1-4. - Rules of interpretation; definitions. 
(a)  Rules of interpretation. This Code shall be construed by the following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or context of the provision. 
(1)  Generally. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. Grammatical, typographical, or scrivener's errors shall not vitiate the meaning of a particular sentence or clause. This Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
(2)  Joint authority. Words imputing joint authority to any number of persons shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of persons, unless otherwise declared in the section giving the authority. 
(3)  Delegation of authority. Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid. 
(4)  Gender, number and tense. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
(5)  Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday, or Tuesday, if Monday is a legal holiday, to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
(6)  Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows; provided, however, in appropriate cases, the terms "and" and "or" may be interchangeable; 
(7)  And. The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(8)  Or. The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(9)  Either, or. The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Code of Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Harlem, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" means the city council of Harlem, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" means Columbia County, Georgia. 
Highway. The term "highway" means bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise expressly provided. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Harlem, Georgia. 
Mayor and city council. The term "mayor and city council" means the governing authority of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means one calendar month. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, partner in a partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall mean the partners or members of any unincorporated entity, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof. 
Preceding and following. When referring to sections or divisions in this Code, the term "preceding" or "following" mean sections or divisions next following or next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" mean: 
(1)  Printing, lithographing or other modes of representing words and letters. 
(2)  Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms "written" and "in writing" mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person's mark. 
Year. The term "year" means one calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 2004, § 10.05) 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor, as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Reference to other sections. 
Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
(Code 2004, § 10.07) 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to offices; name designations. 
(a)  Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
(b)  Name designations. Whenever any section refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is incorrectly stated; or at any time the referenced entity is not in place; the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named or not, shall mean that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were transferred. 
(Code 2004, § 10.08) 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal or modification of Code sections. 
When a section of this Code is repealed which repealed a former section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this Code, the former section or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
(Code 2004, § 10.11) 
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances unaffected. 
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication; to that end, nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(11)  Rezoning property or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(12)  An act by the council that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(13)  An act by the council that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(14)  An act by the council the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(15)  Intergovernmental agreements or mutual aid agreements. 
(16)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 10.13) 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances which amend Code. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of the City of Harlem, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Harlem, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered _____, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Violations; general penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful or an offense by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise allowed by state law, and pursuant to section 4.13 of the Charter: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Likewise, with respect to multiple violations, as defined herein, each separate violation constitutes as separate offense. 
(d)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(e)  Community service may be substituted for the fine with the rate of hourly work set to that of the federal minimum wage. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not preclude equitable relief. 
(h)  The imposition of any fine or imprisonment, or both, for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all violators shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within the time as prescribed by the court having jurisdiction of the matter, and, in the absence of any completion time being fixed by the court, within a reasonable time after the violations occur. 
(i)  The application of any fine, imprisonment or other penalty shall not be construed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or to postpone any action required. 
(j)  The remedies herein set out for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be cumulative of all other remedies, civil or criminal, provided by the laws of the state or by the ordinances of the county. 
(k)  Violations of this section shall be tried in the municipal court of the county, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Code 2004, § 10.99) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-19. - Compensation. 
(a)  The mayor shall be compensated for services to the city in an amount as determined by ordinance from time to time. 
(b)  Each council member shall be compensated for services as a council member in an amount as determined by ordinance from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-1; Code 2004, § 30.01) 
Sec. 2-20. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall hold the regular public meeting at 7:00 p.m. on the fourth Monday of each month with the work session at 7:00 p.m. on the Thursday immediately preceding the fourth Monday of each month at the public safety building; provided, however, the mayor and city council may, by majority vote reschedule, with two weeks' notice, any city council meeting of any given month for another specified time, date and place. 
(b)  Notice of any change in any given regular city council meeting shall be posted in the public safety building at least two weeks in advance of the meeting time, and the notice shall further be given in a newspaper in general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-11; Code 2004, § 30.02; Ord. No. 262, 4-12-1982; Am. Ord. No. 356, 4-14-2003; Am. Ord. No. 358, 4-14-2003; Am. Ord. No. 434, 1-11-2010; Am. Ord. No. 462, 3-17-2014; Am. Ord. No. 1704, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 2-21. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and city council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business during the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-12; Code 2004, § 30.03) 
Sec. 2-22. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Corrections, if any, to be made in the minutes; 
(3)  Unfinished business; 
(4)  New business; 
(5)  Other business. 
(b)  If the mayor and city council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and city council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-13; Code 2004, § 30.04) 
Sec. 2-23. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and city council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-14; Code 2004, § 30.05) 
Sec. 2-24. - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-15; Code 2004, § 30.06) 
Sec. 2-25. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table; 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  To refer to a committee; 
(5)  To amend; 
(6)  To strike out or insert; or 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-16; Code 2004, § 30.07) 
Sec. 2-26. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1985, § 2-1-17; Code 2004, § 30.08) 
Sec. 2-27. - Standing committees. 
(a)  There are established the following standing committees of the city council, which each shall consist of not less than two members of the council. 
(1)  Committee on government operations. 
(2)  Committee on finance. 
(3)  Committee on legal affairs. 
(b)  Appointment; term; vacancy. 
(1)  The mayor shall annually at the first council meeting in January appoint the standing committee members. 
(2)  All such appointments shall be for one year. 
(3)  The mayor shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of each of the standing committees. 
(4)  The mayor shall have the authority to appoint members to the standing committees, however the council shall have the authority to reject any appointment by majority vote. 
(5)  Should a vacancy occur in any committee by the withdrawal for whatever reason of any committee member, the appointment may be made at any time by the mayor to fill the vacancy. 
(6)  The standing committees shall meet whenever necessary and may be called upon by the chair of each committee, the mayor or the city manager. 
(7)  The committees shall present their findings to the full city council during regular meetings for consideration when necessary. 
Code 2004, § 30.09; Ord. No. 1706, 6-27-2017) 
Sec. 2-28. - Oliver Hardy steering committee. 
(a)  Steering committee. The committee shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  The steering committee shall be comprised of five regular members to be appointed by the city council and shall have terms of three years. The members are not required to be residents of the city but shall have an interest in the event. 
(2)  In addition, the council shall have the ability but are not required to appoint four ex-officio members to the steering committee. One each from the following: Harlem Arts Council, Harlem Merchants Association, and two representative of the mayor and city council with the consent of the city manager (if representative is an employee) to serve as public safety coordinators; said representatives should be active police officers or fire fighters. Ex-officio members shall have the right to participate in discussions but are not entitled to vote on matters under consideration by the committee. 
(3)  The committee shall from time to time report to the mayor and city council on the annual Oliver Hardy Festival, and shall be required to present a recap of the festival to the mayor and city council within 60 days after the event at a regular meeting of the city council. 
(b)  Procedures. The committee shall: 
(1)  Appoint one of their members to act as chair of the committee and another member to act as vice-chair of the committee on an annual basis; 
(2)  Meet a minimum of once every month; 
(3)  Operate in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order and allow public input during their regular meetings to anyone who attends; and 
(4)  The committee shall establish such ad hoc committees as may be required from time to time to provide the committee with advice on specific events, proposals and initiatives. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The committee shall: 
(1)  Recommend suggestions to the mayor and city council for ways to improve the festival. 
(2)  Have authority to spend money within an annual budget approved by the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Hold events to raise funds for the event, provided that all funds are presented to the city to be held in a restricted account for the sole purpose of supporting the festival. 
(4)  Establish the festival venue areas, vendor list, entertainment schedule, and dates for the annual festival and all other matters necessary and reasonable for planning and executing the annual festival. 
(5)  Coordinate all recommendations and festival details with the representative of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2004, § 30.10; Ord. No. 1721, 1-22-2018) 
Secs. 2-29—2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-60. - City clerk; duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(3)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the same only upon orders of the mayor and city council; and 
(4)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-1; Code 2004, § 31.01) 
Sec. 2-61. - City attorney; duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall perform the duties and responsibilities set out in the city Charter, in addition to those duties designated by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-4-2; Code 2004, § 31.02) 
Sec. 2-62. - City manager; duties. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish responsibilities, powers, and duties of city manager pursuant to section 2.30 of the Charter of the city and to provide for a job description and duties of the position. 
(b)  Duties. The city manager is charged with the responsibility of acting as the chief executive and administrative officer of the city of ensuring that all administrative functions of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city as determined by the mayor and city council. The city manager's duties shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Faithful execution and enforcement of the laws of the United States, this state and city, including ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations of the city; 
(2)  Preparation of the agenda and attendance at meetings of the mayor and city council; 
(3)  Preparation and recommendations for adoption of any measures deemed proper and suitable for the city; 
(4)  The monitoring of the city's overall financial condition and its future needs and reporting of the condition and the needs to the mayor and city council as needed; 
(5)  Preparation of correspondence to state and federal agencies and departments regarding state or federal qualifications and rules for the city, grants, or available loans, and reporting the correspondence to the mayor and city council; 
(6)  Appointment, suspension, or removal of any city employee, except the city recorder, recorder pro temp, city attorney, city treasurer, city clerk or in accordance with the general rules, regulations, policies or ordinances of the city; 
(7)  Preparation and submission of an annual proposed budget and capital program to the mayor and city council as directed; 
(8)  Administration of all departments, properties, and operations of the city, subject to the general direction and control of the mayor and city council; 
(9)  Coordination of the investigation of the affairs, records, accounts, and expenditures of the various commissions and boards created by the city and report the findings of same to the mayor and city council at least once per year; 
(10)  Communication with the city attorney concerning any matter effecting the legal interest of the city; 
(11)  At the request of the mayor and city council, act as liaison with boards, offices, agencies, and commissions of the city; 
(12)  The exercise of any other powers and the performance of any other duties required or authorized by the mayor and city council not inconsistent with the Charter, ordinances, and resolutions of the city. 
(c)  Residence requirements. During his tenure of office, the city manager shall reside in the city normal moving and transfer of residence time excepted. 
(d)  Restrictions. The city manager shall not engage in any other business or profession during his tenure of office without the permission and approval of the mayor and city council. 
Code 2004, § 31.03; Ord. No. 354-A, 1-14-2002) 
Sec. 2-63. - Code enforcement officer; duties. 
(a)  Office created. The city hereby creates the position of code enforcement officer to oversee the enforcement of this Code. 
(b)  Oversight. The code enforcement officer shall report directly to the city manager or his/her designee, and shall be appointed or removed directly by the city manager or designee subject to the Harlem Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual. 
(c)  Requirements. The code enforcement officer shall not be required to be a sworn police officer by the state. The city manager at his or her discretion shall appoint anyone as code enforcement officer as he or she sees fit whether on a part-time or full-time basis. Educational and training opportunities will be made available and internal policies and procedures shall be developed within community development department subject to the city manager's approval for all matters involving the code enforcement officer. 
(d)  Goals. The city sets forth that the goal of the code enforcement officer shall be gaining compliance with all provisions of this Code.. However, it is understood that from time to time, the code enforcement officer may have to issue citations which would fall under the jurisdiction of the Harlem Municipal Court as provided by law. No citation shall be issued without direct approval by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1814, 9-24-2018) 
Sec. 2-64. - Purpose of personnel policies. 
As deemed necessary and appropriate, the city council may establish certain personnel policies, manuals or other controlling documents (including organizational charts and pay scales) for the purpose of providing for an orderly process for administering the personnel system of the city and to provide the fundamental features for an effective system of personnel administration. These personnel policies and procedures are not and do not form an express or implied contract between the city and its employees. 
(Code 2004, § 33.01; Ord. No. 459, 12-16-2013) 
Secs. 2-65—2-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-85—2-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-112. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-1-1; Code 2004, § 32.01) 
Sec. 2-113. - Responsibilities. 
The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2004, § 32.02; Code 1985, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 2-114. - Taser device policy. 
The city council adopts a policy regulating the use of Taser devices by the department of safety officers after said officers have been duly trained in the use of such device. This policy shall become a part of the department of public safety standard operating procedure manual. 
(Code 2004, § 32.03; Ord. No. 390, 2-19-2007) 
Secs. 2-115—2-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crossing over fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; turning in false alarm of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 

Sec. 2-142. - Fire chief and members. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and shall be composed of the other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-1; Code 2004, § 32.20) 
Sec. 2-143. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-2; Code 2004, § 32.21) 
Sec. 2-144. - Enforcement. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency every enrolled member of the department is empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this chapter and any other code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-3; Code 2004, § 32.22) 
Sec. 2-145. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-4; Code 2004, § 32.23) 
Sec. 2-146. - Testing of siren. 
The fire chief of the city shall regularly sound the fire siren for the purpose of testing the same at the time on a regular basis to be selected by the fire chief. For the purpose of implementing the test, the fire chief is authorized and directed to install an automatic clock device which can be calibrated automatically to conduct the test on a regular basis. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-5; Code 2004, § 32.24; Ord. No. 225, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 2-147. - Service beyond city limits. 
(a)  The owners of all single-family residential structures located outside the city limits, but within the area to be served by the city volunteer fire department, as established by mutual agreement among all fire departments of the county (the unincorporated service area), shall pay a fee to the city for fire protection services computed on the basis, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, of the fair market value of the improvements as valued by the county board of tax assessors; provided, however, there is established a minimum annual fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for all the structures located outside the city limits, but within the area served by the fire department and a maximum fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for all the structures. 
(b)  The owners of all commercial, business, or industrial structures located in the unincorporated service area shall pay an annual fee of an amount, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, of the fair market value of all improvements to real estate located at one location within the fire protection area as valued by the county board of tax assessors; provided, however, there shall be a minimum fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for all the structures and a maximum fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for the structures located at one location. 
(c)  The owners of all structures, commercial and residential, located within the unincorporated service area shall receive the same fire protection services afforded by the fire department to owners of structures within the city and to those paying the subscription fee without the necessity of paying an annual fee to the city, provided the owners register annually with the fire department and agree to pay to the city the sum, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for each and every call to a residential structure that the fire department shall receive to go to the structure and a fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, for each and every call to a business, commercial, or industrial structure that the fire department shall receive to go to the structure. 
(d)  In the event the annual fees established herein are not paid within 30 days of the date billed, there shall be added a ten percent penalty for payment during the following 30 days. If payment has not been made within 60 days, the owners will be deemed to have declined fire protection services and the fire department shall be under no obligation to furnish the service. Should the fire department elect to respond to the call even though the owner is not a subscriber as provided herein, the city shall charge a fee as mutually agreed, or if none, a fee not less than the limits stated in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-6; Code 2004, § 32.25; Ord. No. 290, 4-13-1987) 
Secs. 2-148—2-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-178. - Establishment. 
The city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is created and established. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-1; Code 2004, § 32.40; Ord. No. 205, 5-17-1960; Ord. No. 215, 6-15-1962) 
Sec. 2-179. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and city council. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of a qualified member by the mayor and city council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-2; Code 2004, § 32.41; Ord. No. 205, 5-17-1960; Ord. No. 215, 6-15-1962) 
Sec. 2-180. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public except where otherwise permitted by state law, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint the employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for the services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-3; Code 2004, § 32.42; Ord. No. 205, 5-17-1960; Ord. No. 215, 6-15-1962) 
Sec. 2-181. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the function and the duty of the planning commission to make sure careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare the plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the municipal subdivision. 
(b)  In particular, the commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the town; 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and city council a zoning ordinance and map for the town; 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for adoption by the governing authority regulations for the subdivision of land and administer the regulations that may be adopted; and 
(4)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the governing authority a planning or official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within the lines within the town. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-4; Code 2004, § 32.43) 
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AREA PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-201. - Establishment. 
The Central Savannah River Area Planning and Development Commission, hereinafter referred to as the area planning commission, is created and established as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq., as amended. The area planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in this division. 
(Code 1985, §6-1-5; Code 2004, § 32.55; Ord. No. 211, 9-19-1961) 
Sec. 2-202. - Membership. 
The Central Savannah River Area Planning and Development Commission shall consist of two members from each of the counties participating in the Area planning commission. Of the two members from each county one shall be appointed by the governing authority municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county. Where the county seat is unincorporated, then one member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the largest unincorporated town in the county in lieu of the county seat. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-12; Code 2004, § 32.56; Ord. No. 211, 9-19-1961) 
Sec. 2-203. - Term of office. 
The term of office for all members shall be five years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-13; Code 2004, § 32.57; Ord. No. 211, 9-19-1961) 
Sec. 2-204. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for one year or until re-elected or their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at the other times as the chairperson or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission may appoint the employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend the funds, and may carry out the cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, which shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-14; Code 2004, § 32.58; Ord. No. 211, 9-19-1961) 
Sec. 2-205. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make the careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare the plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire Central Savannah River Area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have the powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 6-1-15; Code 2004, § 32.59) 
Secs. 2-206—2-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITY TREE BOARD 

Sec. 2-234. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city which shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 32.65; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-235. - Term of office. 
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the city council shall be three years. 
(Code 2004, § 32.66; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-236. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2004, § 32.67; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-237. - Operation. 
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 2004, § 32.68; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-238. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council, and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within scope of its work. 
(Code 2004, § 32.69; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Secs. 2-239—2-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-270. - Sessions. 
The municipal court of the city shall convene monthly at a time and date determined by the chief judge of municipal court. However, the addition of permanent scheduled court dates occurring monthly shall be authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-2; Ord. No. 257, 9-8-1980; Am. Ord. No. 300, 3-14-1988; Am. Ord. No. 328, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 1813, § 34.01, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 2-271. - Terms and compensation of municipal court chief and deputy judges. 
(a)  The term of judges shall be for a period of four years, and shall expire upon the judge being removed from office by the mayor and city council or until another judge is appointed at the end of the current judge's term. 
(b)  The compensation for the chief judge of the municipal court and the deputy judge shall be at a rate determined from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-3-1; Ord. No. 257, 9-8-1980; Am. Ord. No. 300, 3-14-1988; Am. Ord. No. 328, 12-14-1994; Ord. No. 1813, § 34.02, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 2-272. - Service of summons. 
(a)  Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by any city law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other city official designated by the city manager or judge. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, and the day, hour, and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by any city law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or other city official when so designated by the city manager or judge, either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his dwelling, house, or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion therein, or by delivering a copy of the summons and complaint to an agent designated by appointment or by law to receive service of process. 
(b)  In the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 34.03, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 2-273. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for same. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 34.04, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 2-274. - Fines. 
Any person against whom a fine is imposed by the municipal court of the city, for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, shall be subject to an additional fee in the amount, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, per violation to be used for the enhancement of the information technology of the public safety department and other court costs, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, is authorized by council and may be imposed by a judge in the event of a conviction. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 34.05, 2-13-2006) 
Sec. 2-275. - Municipal court solicitor. 
The office of solicitor of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the city in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by state law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time contract position. 
(1)  Any person appointed as the solicitor for the municipal court of the city shall be a member in good standing of the state bar and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the solicitor for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(2)  The city manager shall select and appoint on behalf of the city a qualified attorney to serve as solicitor in the municipal court of the city. The duties of the solicitor are: 
a.  To attend each session of the municipal court unless excused by the judge thereof and to remain until the business of the city is disposed of; 
b.  To aid the municipal court judge in organizing the court as he may require; 
c.  To draw up all indictments or accusations, when necessary; 
d.  To attend before the appellate courts when any ordinance violation case emanating from the municipal court of the city is tried, to argue the same, and to perform any other duty therein which the interest of the city may require; 
e.  To advise law enforcement and code enforcement officers concerning the sufficiency of evidence, warrants, and similar matters relating to the investigation and prosecution of Code violations; 
f.  To represent the city prosecuting all charges brought or initiated by any city employee acting in the course of his employment with the city; 
g.  To perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or which necessarily appertain to their office. 
(3)  The appointment shall be made for a term consisting of one calendar year or portion thereof. The compensation and other terms of employment shall be set forth in an agreement between the city and the solicitor. 
(4)  The solicitor of the municipal court for the city shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as solicitor of the municipal court for the city." 
(Ord. No. 452, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 1813, § 34.06, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 2-276. - Public defender. 
(a)  The office of municipal court public defender is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation for those meeting the state requirements of indigent defense. Anyone, who may be incarcerated upon their conviction in the municipal court, shall be entitled to a public defender if they cannot provide for their own representation. It shall be the duty of the public defender to provide an application for indigent service and to determine the eligibility of those seeking representation therein. 
(b)  The public defender shall be appointed by the chief municipal court judge on a case-by-case basis. The compensation of the public defender shall be set forth in an agreement between the chief judge and public defender with the acceptance of the city manager. In addition, the municipal court judge shall appoint public defenders from a list of court-approved attorneys approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1813, § 34.06, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 2-277—2-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; qualification of candidates, O.C.G.A. § 22-2-130 et seq. 

Sec. 2-309. - Election officials. 
The mayor and city council shall by resolution annually appoint a Municipal Election Superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-1; Code 2004, § 35.01) 
Sec. 2-310. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-2; Code 2004, § 35.02; Am. Ord. No. 324, 8-8-1994) 
Sec. 2-311. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notices of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the governing authority in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-3; Code 2004, § 35.03; Am. Ord. No. 323, 8-8-1994) 
Sec. 2-312. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election for the office of mayor or city council member shall be three percent of the annual compensation of the office sought, which fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-4; Code 2004, § 35.04) 
Sec. 2-313. - Polling place. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265, the polling place shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-2-5; Code 2004, § 35.05) 
Secs. 2-314—2-344. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-345. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointee means any person appointed to a city board, committee or commission by the city council or mayor. 
City staff means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city, as well as any full-time or part-time employee of any independent contractor contracted to perform specific duties for, and on behalf of the city. 
Family member means the spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of a city councilmember or an appointee or the mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law or daughter-in-law of a city councilmember or an appointee. 
Financial interest means all direct ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is ten percent or more. 
Member means and includes the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any person appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Substantial interest means the following: 
(1)  Funds received by the member from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or 
(2)  The member is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Code 2004, § 30.20; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-346. - Prohibitions. 
All members shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Compliance with the law. Members shall comply with all laws of the United States, the state, and the city in the performance of their public duties. These laws include, but are not limited to: the United States and Georgia Constitutions; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, elections, campaigns, financial disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open processes of government; and city ordinances and written policies. 
(2)  Policy role of members. Members shall respect and adhere to the structure of government of the city as outlined in the city's charter and policies and procedures. In this structure, the city council determines the policies of the city with the advice, information and analysis provided by the public, boards, committees, commissions, and city staff. 
(3)  Acceptance of gifts, benefits or remuneration. 
a.  Members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
1.  Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city, unless: a member's contractual relationship with such person, corporation, or group existed prior to the city's contractual relationship or prior to the member's election or appointment to office; the member, if in office at the time the contractual, business or financial relationship came before the city for consideration, disclosed such relationship or, if not in office at such time, has immediately disclosed the relationship to the city after being elected or appointed to office and becoming aware of the city's relationship with such person, corporation or group; the member abstained from discussion of the city's consideration of entering a contract with such person, corporation, or group or competing vendor; the member abstained from voting on any matter related to the relationship between such person, corporation, or group or the subject contract or services; and the member did not make personal use of any official non-public information, as prohibited by subsection (9) of this section; 
2.  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have a member exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; or 
3.  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the member. 
b.  Members shall not directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, benefit or thing of value for himself or another person if: 
1.  It could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the future, and the member is involved in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large; or 
2.  It could reasonably be considered to influence, benefit or reward the member, and the member recently has been, or is now or within six months in the future, involved in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large. 
c.  The above prohibitions shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  Occasional non-pecuniary receipt of trinkets or gifts with a value of less than $100.00 or admission to and/or consumption of food and beverages at a breakfast, lunch, dinner, function or other event; 
2.  Award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
3.  Transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 as now or hereafter amended; 
4.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
5.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; or 
6.  Any gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value from a family member. 
(4)  Conflict of interest. 
a.  A member may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the member has a substantial interest. 
b.  A member who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and city council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
c.  Where the interest of a member in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the member may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(5)  Use of public property. A member shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct city staff to use such property for these purposes. 
(6)  Coercion by members. A member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or a family member, or those with whom a member has a financial interest. 
(7)  Unauthorized use of city staff. A member shall not use his superior position to unduly pressure or request or otherwise require a member of the city staff to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of a family member, business, social, church or fraternal interest; 
b.  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
c.  Work for him personally without offering him just compensation. 
(8)  Restrictions on contracts with former members. The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(9)  Improper use of official non-public information. Members shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information, which at the time of its disclosure is not subject to being made available to the general public, for the purpose of furthering a private interest regardless of whether the private interest belongs to the member or a third party. 
(10)  Unauthorized attempts to bind the city. Members shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure, nor shall members attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization to purchase or otherwise be liable for any goods, services or property. 
(11)  Improper influence in city judicial matters. No member shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 30.21; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-347. - Receipt of complaints; service; response. 
(a)  All complaints against members shall be filed with the city manager; provided, however, to discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a member, whether currently serving as a member or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(b)  No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than one year after a violation of this code of ethics is alleged to have occurred, and a complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation; such limitation periods to be measured from the date of the last act occurring in furtherance of such violation. No proceedings under this article shall be instituted or prosecuted after the earlier of: 
(1)  The expiration of the term of office of the person complained against; or 
(2)  The resignation, death, vacancy, disqualification or withdrawal from office of the person against whom a complaint is filed. 
(c)  No action may be taken on any complaint which arises out of substantially the same facts or circumstances which have previously served as the basis for a complaint pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Separate complaints. 
(1)  A separate complaint shall be filed for each person alleged to have engaged in any activity violating this article even if the allegations arise from the same factual basis. Each complaint shall state: 
a.  A separate count for each alleged violation; 
b.  The specific section of state law, the city Charter, or this code of ethics alleged to be violated for each count; 
c.  With specificity, the facts which are alleged to constitute the violation; and 
d.  The documentary evidence which the charging party possesses. 
(2)  Copies of said documentary evidence shall be attached to the complaint as exhibits. 
(e)  All complaints shall comply with and contain the following oath: 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
COUNTY OF COLUMBIA 
AFFIDAVIT 
Personally appeared before the undersigned officer duly authorized to administer oaths, (Name of person filing complaint), who on oath deposes that the statements in the foregoing complaint are true and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief. The affiant further states he is a registered Harlem elector and acknowledges that false statements made in this application may result in a prosecution against them for false swearing, a felony under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71. 
(Signature of person filing complaint) 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
Notary Public 
(f)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the city manager will deliver a copy of the complaint to the city manager. 
(g)  Original pleadings shall be filed with the city manager and the city manager shall cause the complaint to be served on the member charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by e-mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. 
(h)  The member charged in the complaint shall have 15 business days to file an answer to the complaint; provided, however, the member charged shall have no obligation to file an answer to any complaint. 
(Code 2004, § 30.22; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-348. - Appointment of arbiter; burden of proof. 
(a)  Upon receipt of complaint, the city manager or his designee, shall transmit the same to the city attorney, who shall review the complaint to ensure compliance with the procedure for filing established by this code of ethics and to determine whether the allegations therein constitute a statement upon which action under this article may be granted. 
(b)  In the event the city attorney finds the complainant has alleged a prima facie case for relief under this article, the city attorney shall appoint an arbiter who: 
(1)  Shall be a competent attorney-at-law of good standing in his profession; 
(2)  Shall have at least five years' experience in the practice of law; and 
(3)  Shall not maintain an office within a ten-mile radius of the city. 
(c)  Once an arbiter is appointed, no member shall communicate with or otherwise contact the arbiter, except as authorized herein, unless such member is the complainant or the member charged in the complaint; however, no party to a complaint shall engage in ex parte communications with the arbiter. 
(d)  Within 15 days of receipt of a complaint, the arbiter shall make an initial investigation into the complaint and may contact the complainant and member as deemed necessary. Upon conclusion of his investigation, the arbiter may dismiss the complaint for lack of cause or may call for appointment of a committee of two councilmembers and the city attorney to further investigate the claim. The councilmembers comprising the committee shall be appointed by the mayor, or the mayor pro tem in the event the complaint is filed against the mayor. 
(e)  In all proceedings under this article, the burden of proof shall be on the complaining party. Further, the quantum of proof required to establish a violation under this article shall be beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(Code 2004, § 30.23; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-349. - Investigation and hearing by committee. 
(a)  The committee shall determine whether the complaint against a member sets forth sufficient facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing. The committee shall have 60 days to complete the investigation. Any complaint deemed non-frivolous by the committee shall warrant a hearing. If the committee determines a hearing is warranted, said hearing shall be held within 60 days of the conclusion of the investigation. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. 
(b)  Upon a determination that the complaint should not be dismissed, the committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. In furtherance of this investigation, the committee may: 
(1)  First, seek such further information from the complainant or the member charged through inquiry or written questions, provided, however the member charged shall have no obligation to answer any inquiries. If it is determined that the complaint should not be dismissed pursuant to this division, then the provisions below shall apply; 
(2)  Conduct a hearing regarding the allegations set forth in the complaint. At any hearing, the member who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right: 
a.  To representation by counsel at all stages of these proceedings; 
b.  To written notice of the hearing at least ten calendar days before the first hearing; 
c.  To hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; 
d.  To not testify; and 
e.  To submit evidence and call witnesses to oppose or mitigate the allegations. In all hearings held under this section, the rules of evidence applicable in civil cases shall apply. 
(c)  All investigations under this section shall be completed within 60 business days of the filing of the complaint. Should the investigation not be completed in said period, the complaint will be deemed dismissed as a failure to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. Within seven business days of the completion of the investigation, the committee shall make a recommendation to the city council to: 
(1)  Dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or that it fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; or 
(2)  Prepare a report of findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Should the committee determine to submit a report in the matter, the report shall consist of: 
(1)  A written finding of facts; 
(2)  A determination that the complaint establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that a violation has been committed, and if so, the specific violation and evidence supporting the same; and 
(3)  A recommendation regarding the punishment for such violation. 
(e)  Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public or private reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(f)  The committee's written determination of findings and recommendations shall be delivered to the city manager who shall provide a copy to the city manager and the mayor and city council and serve a copy on the complainant and member charged by personal service, by e-mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. Such findings shall not be final until approved by vote of the city council, as provided in section 2-350(a). 
(Code 2004, § 30.24; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-350. - Report to mayor and city council. 
(a)  Upon receipt of findings and recommendations from the committee, the mayor and city council may: 
(1)  By simple majority accept the findings and recommendations of the committee; 
(2)  By simple majority accept the findings of fact and reject the recommended discipline, instead substituting its own discipline; or 
(3)  By a supermajority consisting of a majority of those present forming a quorum, plus one, reject the findings and recommendations and either: dismiss the complaint, or conduct its own hearing in accordance with section 2-349(b)(2). Upon the completion of such hearing, the findings and recommendations of the mayor and city council shall be binding. 
(b)  If the subject of the complaint is the mayor or any city councilmember, he will not be allowed to vote pursuant to this section, serve on the committee, or participate in any hearing held pursuant to this section other than as set forth and allowable by the member charged, nor shall such position be counted for the purposes of establishing a quorum. 
(c)  Upon a final judgment and certification of the minutes of the meeting disposing of the matter, the city manager shall serve the respondent with a copy of the certified minutes and findings and recommendations by personal service, e-mail, certified mail (return receipt requested) or by Federal Express or other overnight delivery service. 
(Code 2004, § 30.25; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 2-351. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any member or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the city council may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 business days after the final action on a complaint pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2004, § 30.26; Ord. No. 1711, 8-28-2017) 
Secs. 2-352—2-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-376. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all purchases made by departments and agencies of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 36.50; Ord. No. 354-C, 2-11-2002) 
Sec. 2-377. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bid, quote or proposal most advantageous to the city means a bid, quote, or proposal chosen on the basis of a variety of considerations including price, quality of merchandise, suitability of merchandise, and service reputation of the vendor, and therefore may not necessarily mean the lowest bid received. 
Field purchases means an informal purchase of supplies needed urgently for an ongoing or in-process city operation in an amount less than $200.00. 
Formal bid or proposal process means a process whereby the city develops a set of specifications that is made available to potential vendors through the city website and the state local government access website. 
Informal quotes, bids or proposals means quotes, bids or proposals obtained by contacting experienced reputable vendors directly. Informal quotes, bids or proposals may be either oral or written depending upon the purchase amount. 
(Code 2004, § 36.51; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-378. - Appropriation required. 
(a)  No city employee shall make any purchase or allow any purchase to be made until an appropriation therefor has been approved by the city council as part of the annual operating budget of the city or as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  The city council must approve and authorize the purchase of any supplies or services which are not a part of or exceed the annual operating budget of the city or a specified department's operating budget. 
(Code 2004, § 36.52; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-379. - Purchase orders and purchase limits. 
(a)  Purchase orders. 
(1)  Unless provided otherwise, a purchase order number must be obtained before placing orders and making purchases with the following exceptions: utilities, attorneys' fees, and engineering fees. Purchase order numbers shall only be issued after submission of a completed and authorized purchase order request form. 
(2)  In the event of a field purchase, a department head shall complete a purchase order request form as soon as practicable, but in no event more than two days after the purchase, and the purchase order request shall contain information as to the nature of the situation that necessitated the purchase. 
(b)  Purchasing approvals and processes are divided into the following five categories and are summarized below: 
(1)  $0.00—$499.99: 
a.  Approvals required: department head. 
b.  Quote/bid/proposal requirement: one informal quote, bid or proposal. 
c.  Form of quote, bid or proposal: oral or written. 
d.  Notice required: none. 
(2)  $500.00—$1,999.99: 
a.  Approvals required: department head and city manager. 
b.  Quote/bid/proposal requirement: one informal quote, bid or proposal. 
c.  Form of quote, bid or proposal: oral or written. 
d.  Notice required: none. 
(3)  $2,000.00—$9,999.99: 
a.  Approvals required: department head and city manager. 
b.  Quote/bid/proposal requirement: two or more informal quotes, bids or proposals. 
c.  Form of quote, bid or proposal: written. 
d.  Notice required: none. 
(4)  $10,000.00—$24,999.99: 
a.  Approvals required: department head and city manager. 
b.  Quote/bid/proposal requirement: three or more informal quotes, bids or proposals. 
c.  Form of quote, bid or proposal: written. 
d.  Notice required: none. 
(5)  $25,000.00 and above: 
a.  Approvals required: department head and city manager. 
b.  Quote/bid/proposal requirement: formal bid or proposal process. 
c.  Form of quote, bid or proposal: written. 
d.  Notice required: city website and state local government access website. 

 
(c)  Purchases shall not be divided for the purposes of evading more stringent requirements. 
(Code 2004, § 36.53; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-380. - Exceptions to bid, quote, and proposal requirements. 
(a)  The following are exceptions to the normal quote, bid and proposal requirements although the appropriate approvals must still be obtained as outlined in section 2-379(b): 
(1)  Purchases made through or under a statewide contract where the item has been competitively bid by an entity such as the state department of administrative services. 
(2)  Purchases made through a collaborative entity that has previously bid the item such as U.S. Communities. 
(3)  Purchases made pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement. 
(4)  Single-source purchases where only one vendor or product can provide the needed good or service. 
(5)  Professional service providers including, but not limited to, engineers, attorneys, and consultants. 
(6)  Field purchases subject to the restrictions outlined above. 
(b)  The city manager may waive bid, quote and proposal requirements for purchases of $25,000.00 or less in cases of emergency or when a purchase is inappropriate for competitive bidding due to the nature of the item, time constraints or other factors. 
(Code 2004, § 36.54; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-381. - Purchase of name-brand goods or services. 
A department head may elect a purchase of a brand-name product or service when the goods compromise a major system, program, or service previously selected due to operational effectiveness, future enhancements or additions, or maintenance and storage of spare parts precludes the mixing of brands, manufacturers, and the like. 
(Code 2004, § 36.55; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-382. - Further negotiations. 
Once a contract is bid and awarded by city officials in accordance with this article, the city reserves the right to further negotiate all terms of the contract if the city determines that it is in the city's best interest to do so without the necessity of rebidding any contract; provided, however, that any negotiations permitted hereunder shall not result in a variance of price terms exceeding 20 percent of the original price. 
(Code 2004, § 36.56; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-383. - Procedure for informal bidding. 
(a)  When informal quotes, bids or proposals are a permitted method of procurement, department heads or their designee may procure goods and services by contacting vendors directly. 
(b)  The number of quotes, bids or proposals required is governed by the purchase amount as outlined in section 2-379(b). 
(c)  The city reserves the right to determine whether quotes, bids or proposals are the appropriate means of procuring a good or service. 
(d)  In all cases, the quote, bid or proposal most advantageous to the city shall be selected. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and to waive technicalities. 
(Code 2004, § 36.57; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-384. - Procedure for formal bidding. 
(a)  When formal bids or quotes are the required method of procurement, the city manager or his designee shall prepare an invitation for bids or proposals that clearly describes the needed goods or services and specifies the date and time by which the bid or proposal must be submitted. 
(b)  The invitation for bids or proposals shall be publicized through the city's website and through the state local government access website for a minimum of ten calendar days. At the discretion of the department head or city manager, the invitation may also be sent directly to known interested vendors. 
(c)  Unless specified in the bid or proposal invitation, a formal bid or proposal opening is not required. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to determine whether bids or proposals are the appropriate means of procuring a good or service. 
(e)  In all cases, the quote, bid or proposal most advantageous to the city shall be selected. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids or proposals and to waive technicalities. 
(Code 2004, § 36.58; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-385. - Administration of competitive bids or proposals. 
(a)  The city shall keep a record of all bids, quotes or proposals submitted as required by applicable open records laws and the records shall be opened to proper inspection by any person. 
(b)  Tied quotes, bids or proposals shall be resolved by the city manager except that if the price exceeds $25,000.00, the city council shall resolve the tie. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to accept or reject any or all bids, to investigate the qualifications of any bidder, and to waive or not waive any and all technicalities or informalities in the bids or proposals when making an award. 
(d)  The city retains custody of all quotes, bids and proposals submitted to the city. 
(Code 2004, § 36.59; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-386. - Authority to determine policies. 
The city manager shall have the authority to promulgate policies to implement this article. 
(Code 2004, § 36.60; Ord. No. 484, 9-28-2015) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; display of prices of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use and preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises by establishments other than full service restaurants; and to protect against concentration of the retail outlets for alcohol in single-family residential areas. 
(Code 2004, § 114.001; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means that person authorized with a work permit and designated by a license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes, but is not limited to, malt beverages, vinous beverages, and spirituous liquors as defined in this section. 
Bar means an establishment that does not meet the definition of a restaurant or farm winery and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
Bar facility means a physical structure, permanent, where the establishment staff dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
Bottle house means any place of business open to the public or any private club which allows guests, patrons or members to bring in and to consume the guest's, patron's or member's alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Casual dining restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place of business where meals are served and available whenever the establishment is opened, and regularly prepared, without sleeping accommodations, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. Any licensed restaurant, in addition to the above requirements, shall be a bona fide public eating place which actually and regularly prepares and serves food on the premises; shall have facilities open and operating to prepare food on the premises for consumption in the establishment, such kitchen to include at a minimum one cooking stove and/or oven, one standard size food refrigerator and freezer, kitchen sink, rotisserie or other appliances specific to the food type and any and all food service requirements of the county health department; with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A casual dining restaurant shall have 70 percent or more of its total annual gross sales of food and alcoholic beverage from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. 
College means only such state, city, church or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment which offers for sale packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off of the premises which may sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and having 5,000 or less square feet of floor area. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the state First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq. 
Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements. 
Fine dining restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place of business where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served tableside, without sleeping accommodations, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. Any licensed restaurant, in addition to the above requirements, shall be a bona fide public eating place which actually and regularly prepares and serves food on the premises; it shall have a full kitchen facility open and operating to prepare food on the premises for consumption in the establishment, such kitchen to include at a minimum one cooking stove and/or oven or equivalent apparatus (this requirement is not met by a microwave oven and/or food rotisserie), one standard size food refrigerator and freezer, kitchen sink, and any and all food service requirements of the county health department; with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A fine dining restaurant shall have 50 percent or more of its total annual gross sales of food and alcoholic beverage (beer, wine or liquor) from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which ten or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 12, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
Legal alien means a person who possesses a valid United States government-issued I-551 card; an application for I-551 status does not meet the legal alien definition. Any other status which allows a person to enter the United States does not comply with this definition. 
License means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor or other ownership entity. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means a person less than 18 years of age. 
Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. However, the sale of spirituous liquors by the package is not permitted inside the city. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled and operated by the city, any city of the state, any municipality of the state, the state, the United States of America or any property owned or managed by a nonprofit organization, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders or more than five percent of the shares of a corporation which has more than 35 shareholders, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. 
Private club means any nonprofit corporation or association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to filing an application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; and 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits for the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a "fixed salary," as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1, as amended from time to time. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of malt or vinous beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any malt or vinous beverage by the drink or bottle. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. The term "retail sale" also includes, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
Spirituous liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines and distilled spirits. 
Tax means tax imposed for each calendar month of the year. 
Underage person means a person who is less than 21 years of age. 
Vinous beverages or wine means any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "vinous beverages" or "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
(Code 2004, § 114.002; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-3. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by local, state and federal law. 
(b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the city council, and is subject to any future ordinances eliminating notice and hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." 
(c)  All new licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to a six-month probationary period. During said period, any violation of this chapter or state law can result in the license or licenses being revoked by the city. Said revocation can be done exclusively by the city manager and does not require approval of the city council. However, the licensee can appeal the revocation to city council. 
(Code 2004, § 114.003; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-4. - Annual license fee to be set by the city council. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee on all persons in the city for the manufacture, distribution, sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, including spirituous malt and fermented wine. The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the city council. 
(b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the office of the city council. 
(c)  Any new license issued under this chapter shall be effective annually from the date the license is issued until December 31 of each year. In the case of revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of a full year since payment of the license fee, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(d)  All license fees required under this chapter shall be paid by cash, certified check, or cashier's check. 
(e)  These fees shall be established by the city council and may be changed from time to time. All fees shall be kept on file in the city manager 's office. 
(Code 2004, § 114.004; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
State Law reference— City license fees on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41, 3-5-43; maximum annual city license fee for distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 4-5. - Renewal of license. 
Any person subject to this chapter shall be required to renew his license on or before December 31 of each year. Failure to pay or renew the license on or before December 31 shall automatically revoke the license. Upon the expiration of the license to sell alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages until a current license is issued. 
(Code 2004, § 114.005; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-6. - Separate license for each place of business. 
A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license under this chapter for each place of business. 
(Code 2004, § 114.006; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 4-7—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-31. - License required for manufacture or sale. 
Unless otherwise provided by this Code: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale except under a wholesale wine and malt beverage license granted by the city council. 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the package for off-premises consumption except wine and malt beverages under a retail alcoholic wine and malt beverage package sales license granted by the city council. No license shall be granted for package sale of spirituous liquors. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail for consumption on-premises except under an alcoholic beverage pouring license granted by the city council. 
(4)  A farm winery is required to obtain a license as provided in this article for the manufacture of wine. 
(Code 2004, § 114.008; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
State Law reference— Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 4-32. - Application; filing; form; contents. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this article shall make written application at the office of the city manager. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders; and such other information as may be required by the city manager, and be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(b)  Each applicant will make an oath that they have read and understand this article and understand that all provisions contained herein are applicable to all applicants for retail or pouring licensees. 
(c)  The applicant shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the city manager. The city manager shall deny the application of any applicant who fails to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of request. Upon the city manager's approval that the application is sufficient, the manager shall confer with the community development director to determine if the application meets the requirements set forth in the land development code. 
(d)  For the purpose of this article, the term "applicant" includes in the case of a partnership or corporation all partners, officers, directors and shareholders of such partnership or corporation. 
(e)  All applications for licenses, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests in retail alcoholic beverage package stores or establishments offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail packaged alcoholic beverages or alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail alcoholic beverage package store or establishment offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business or establishment is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; and 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sub-lessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail alcoholic beverage package store or establishment offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink is located. 
(f)  Each application for an alcoholic beverage license at a location for which there is no existing city license for the same type of alcoholic beverage license in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing the location of the building or proposed building and location of all customer entries in relation and distance to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the distance requirements set, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all such real property. 
(Code 2004, § 114.009; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-33. - Citizenship; residence and age requirements. 
(a)  Where the applicant for a license under this article is a corporation, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the corporation and either the majority shareholder thereof, or a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
(b)  Where the applicant for a license under this article is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or a person employed full-time by the partnership in a managing capacity. 
(c)  Where the applicant for a license under this article is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then the sole proprietor and a person employed full-time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. 
(d)  In order to be eligible to hold an alcoholic beverage license, the individual proposed as the licensee must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making the application. No license or permit for temporary alcohol shall be issued to anyone who is less than 25 years of age at the time the application for a license is filed. 
(e)  If the licensee leaves employment or no longer qualifies as complying with the definition of the term "managing capacity" the alcoholic beverage license shall be void. However, when filing an application the applicant may identify a substitute licensee, who shall meet all the requirements as the original licensee and shall be approved by the city manager. The substitute licensee may serve as licensee and the alcoholic beverage license shall remain valid in the event that the original licensee no longer qualifies as licensee. 
(f)  The licensee shall notify the city manager in writing of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all managers and employees who are authorized to receive court documents, communications and notices required under this article at the location of the business and shall keep such notification current. 
(Code 2004, § 114.010; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-34. - False information in application. 
Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license or permit issued under this article shall be unlawful, and shall be cause for a denial thereof. If any such license or permit has previously been granted under the above-described circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of such license or permit. The omission of information relating to a conviction of a crime, be it misdemeanor or felony, shall constitute a material omission for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 114.011; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
State Law reference— False statements on application, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71. 
Sec. 4-35. - Sheriff's investigation of applications. 
After the community development director has determined that the application meets the requirements set forth in the land development code, the application shall be forwarded to the sheriff's office by the applicant. All applications required by this article shall be investigated by the sheriff's department, which shall report its recommendation to the city manager. No action shall be taken by the city or by any applicant with respect to any application until the sheriff's department investigation is completed. The sheriff's department shall make its recommendation within 30 days after receipt of all required information and any additional information requested by the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 114.012; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-36. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
All new applications for an alcohol or beverage license, or applications for licenses at a new location or a location which has been previously denied shall not be granted without a public hearing of the city council. Pursuant to notice published in the legal organ pursuant to O.C.G.A § 36-66-4, which notice shall contain information on the pending application including location, license being sought, and name of applicant. The applicant shall pay the city a fee as set by council to cover charges associated with said advertisement. The advertisement shall be made one time within 15 to 45 days of when said application shall be considered by the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 114.013; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-37. - Initial consideration of application and appeal. 
(a)  All new applications for licenses or applications for licenses at new locations within the city made under this article shall be acted upon at the noticed hearing unless an objection is filed as provided herein. If the application is incomplete, or does not meet the legal requirements of this article, the city manager shall deny the license without a public hearing. Any license at a location that has not been licensed before, or any licenses that are seeking reissuance after revocation for any reason shall only be issued by the city council after public hearing as provided for in this article. Licenses not requiring a public hearing by the city council shall be acted on by the city manager within 15 days of receipt of the sheriff's office findings. The city manager is authorized to approve or deny the following type licenses which are all at locations previously approved for alcohol licenses by the city council: 
(1)  Change of ownership or corporation; 
(2)  A new owner or business seeking to obtain a license at a previously approved location; 
(3)  Transfer of license; or 
(4)  Modification of license or addition of license. 
(b)  The decision of the city manager shall be transmitted to the applicant by certified mail. Any decision of the city manager shall be final unless appeal is made to the city council by an aggrieved party within ten days from the date that the decision of the city manager is mailed to the applicant. 
(Code 2004, § 114.014; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-38. - Circumstances prohibiting issuance. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license may be issued where the application or other evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  That the applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made; 
(2)  That the applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any city, state, municipality or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked; 
(3)  That the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application; 
(4)  That any applicant for a retail license under this article is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail and wholesale; 
(5)  That any applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city or to the state; 
(6)  The applicant has demonstrated lack of knowledge of the city ordinances and federal and state law regulating the business. Prima facie evidence of lack of knowledge, as described in this section, would include, but is not limited to, violations of such law or regulation, regulating the business; or 
(7)  The applicant fails to answer questions on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or to provide accurate information regarding laws and regulations governing the business. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the circumstances set out in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section, the city manager or the city council may waive such circumstances and grant a license. 
(Code 2004, § 114.015; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-39. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for pecuniary gain shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal shareholder, or licensee shall have been convicted within the ten-year period immediately prior to the consideration of the alcoholic beverage application for any felony or a violation of federal, state, or local law involving moral turpitude, or for the violation of any city, state, or federal law of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place; or any charge relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or serious traffic offense as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390 et seq., the traffic offense of hit and run or leaving the scene of an accident, but excluding any first conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or for whom outstanding indictments, accusations or criminal charges exist charging such individual with any of such offenses and for which no final disposition has occurred. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this section, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. The city council may waive this disqualification after hearing in all cases. The applicant shall appeal any disqualification by virtue of this section directly to the city council without hearing by the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 114.016; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-40. - Denial on basis of license already held. 
(a)  No retail licensee or person having an interest therein shall have any business or commercial transactions with a wholesaler or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages other than the purchase of and payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person having an interest therein to have any connection, either directly or indirectly, in any scheme or device to obtain an interest in a retail package store, being more than allowed by this article, or to engage in any scheme or device to use another person as a guise or dummy to obtain a retail license. 
(Code 2004, § 114.017; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-41. - Distance requirements from schools, churches, parks, and other facilities. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus, where so permitted by resolution or ordinance of the county or municipality. As used in this subsection, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space, and meets such other criteria as may be required by the local governing authority of the county or municipality; or 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any city or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and which public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
(1)  Hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding July 1, 1981; 
(2)  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own homes, subject to licensing under chapter 7; and 
(3)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only who shall be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges 
(d)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(e)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by article 1 of chapter 3 of title 8, the Housing Authorities Law. 
(Code 2004, § 114.018; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21; adoption of rules and regulations; determination of location of distilleries or businesses licensed by municipal or city governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
Sec. 4-42. - Distance requirements-exemption for existing establishments. 
(a)  Any application for renewal or transfer of a license under this article on an existing licensed location shall not be subject to the distance requirements from churches, schools, child daycare centers, alcoholic treatment centers, housing authority property, and other distance requirements set forth in this article, nor subject to zoning standards or additional architectural standards as set forth in this article. An applicant requesting renewal or transfer of a license under this section must meet all other requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(b)  In addition, any bar facilities legally operating before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to continue to operate under the regulations that were in place when their original license was issued. 
(Code 2004, § 114.019; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-43. - Additional standards for issuance, renewal, transfer or denial of retail license. 
(a)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this article, the following standards shall apply for issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances from schools and churches, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the immediate area; 
(2)  Evidence that the location of the type of structure could create difficulty in police supervision; 
(3)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area; 
(4)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property; 
(5)  Evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to an intoxicated person or to an underage person; 
(6)  Evidence that the conducting of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the sheriff to answer excessive complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie a congregation of underage persons. The term "excessive" means three or more complaints involving the business within any cumulative three months selected; or 
(7)  Evidence that any agent or employee of any corporation in which any shareholder of the applicant had any interest, violated any ordinance, law or statute regulating the business. 
(b)  In addition to the standards set out in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this section, the following evidence shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulations or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  If the applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(Code 2004, § 114.020; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-44. - Supplemental requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued to any applicant that does not meet the requirements of: 
(1)  A casual dining restaurant or fine dining restaurant, or a private club as defined in this article; 
(2)  A hotel that includes a restaurant when sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only in the restaurant or as an in-room service provided to guests by the hotel; 
(3)  The square foot area of a bar facility in a restaurant shall not be greater than 25 percent of the square footage of the dining area of the establishment where tables are located excluding kitchen area, hall, restrooms, waiting area, and areas where games or pool tables are located. 
(b)  No bar, other than a bar facility in a restaurant meeting the food sales requirement of a restaurant, nor any bottle house shall be operated in the city. 
(c)  Failure to produce satisfactory evidence that a business meets the percentage of food requirement of its total annual food and beverage sales from the sale of food as required to be a restaurant shall be cause for denial or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Code 2004, § 114.021; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-45. - Restrictions upon transfers. 
Licenses under this article shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval of the city manager and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: 
(1)  In case of the death of any person holding such a license or any interest therein, the license may, in the discretion of the city manager, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(2)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(3)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. 
(4)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee, and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license. 
(5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or an additional stockholder. 
(6)  A change in ownership as set forth in this section requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this article. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership or distribution of ownership to the city manager. 
(8)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. 
(Code 2004, § 114.022; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-46. - Temporary event alcohol permit. 
(a)  A temporary event alcohol permit may be requested by any group holding a special event that has been approved by the city council. Such permit shall be for the sale of beer and wine only and the sale of such shall meet all requirements for hours of operation that pertains to other licensed restaurants. 
(b)  The applicant must submit a completed application to the city manager along with the special event permit submitted to the clerk of the city council. A temporary event alcohol permit shall be issued only in conjunction with a special event which has originally been approved by the city council manager, pursuant to the requirements of this Code. For repeat events if there have been no major changes from the original application submitted to council and approved, the city manager may issue the special event/temporary alcohol permitted, provided that in addition there were no complaints or citations issued in conjunction with said special event. In addition, the applicant must obtain a state special event alcoholic beverage permit before any sales commence and provide the city manager with information required for said permit. All applicants who apply for a temporary event alcohol permit must have food available to event attendees for free or for sale. 
(c)  A separate application must be made for each location and for each event. No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year and all events must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the license issued and shall subject the applicant to prosecution under the laws of the state. A fee shall be charged per event per permit. 
(d)  The granting of a temporary event alcohol permit is a privilege subject to be annulled and revoked if the applicant is deemed to not conduct the event in accordance with ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. Additionally, the applicant shall comply with any administrative requirements set forth by the city manager as a condition of the permit. 
(Code 2004, § 114.024; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-47. - Architectural and zoning standards. 
(a)  Premises requirements. All applicants for licenses for premises that have not previously been in use for the same purpose as applied for shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone, steel or wood. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar city codes. An applicant for retail or pouring license shall obtain and file with his application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant shall operate his business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided in this article. 
(b)  Wholesalers. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages unless the wholesaler's business is to be located in an area of the city that is appropriately zoned for the same. 
(c)  Pouring licenses. No pouring license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location is zoned B-1, B-2, or B-3 under the zoning laws of the city, or is in use as a business under a specific special use permit, provided that this section shall not apply to private clubs as defined in this article. No license shall be issued for a location that operates as a nonconforming use. 
(d)  Package sales. No license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business, except within the areas zoned B-1, B-2 or B-3. No license shall be issued for a location which is a nonconforming use. No license issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under such license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, or farm winery, or is located in a shopping center or multiple story business building. The term "clearly visible" means that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. The term "front area" means the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. 
(e)  Farm wineries. A farm winery shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(Code 2004, § 114.025; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-48. - Hearings and appeals before the city council. 
(a)  Applicants who have appealed shall be given written notice of the date, time and place when the city council will consider the respective matter. A sign shall be posted by the city manager at the location giving notice of the date, time and place when the city council shall consider the application. The applicant and interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by the city council. 
(b)  Minutes and records of all proceedings before the city council shall be kept and maintained in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall consider the matter and shall, by a majority of the required quorum render a written decision not more than 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall be transmitted to the applicant and to all parties that filed objections, if any, by certified mail. 
(d)  The decision of the city council, unless appealed in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, shall be final. Should the applicant be denied the applicant will not be entitled to reapply for a period of 180 days. The 180-day period shall begin on the day upon which the denial is deemed final. 
(e)  The decision of the city council on an appeal under this section shall be final unless appeal is made to the superior court of the county. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the city council by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 114.026; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-49. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses under this article must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application; and if not so obtained, the permit granted shall be void. 
(b)  When a license under this article has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city manager the required fees, the license shall be issued. 
(Code 2004, § 114.027; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 4-50—4-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 4-74. - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or state law, the package and by the drink sale of wine or beer on Sundays is lawful and has been approved by a majority of the voters of the city in a referendum. 
(Code 2004, § 114.028; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-75. - Outdoor patios/sidewalk cafe sales and consumption. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a retail consumption dealer in a patio/open area type environment if the retail consumption dealer has an approved alcohol license by the city council. 
(b)  To obtain such approval, plans for the proposed patio/open area shall be submitted with a copy of existing licenses and shall include detailed explanations concerning the boundaries of the proposed patio/open area, any enclosed structures to be utilized, and measures to be taken to avoid consumption off the premises. 
(c)  There must be an emergency exit from the patio/open sales area subject to city manager approval. 
(d)  People shall not gather outside any building in which alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed or be allowed to loiter and mill about in conjunction with a patio consumption area. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee operating the business in such building to prevent such gatherings. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverage to leave the building or area designated as a patio consumption area. 
(Code 2004, § 114.029; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-76. - Selling alcohol prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell alcohol within the city except pursuant to a duly issued license authorizing the sales undertaken. 
(b)  On school grounds. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person in any school building or on any school grounds. 
(c)  In parks. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person in any city park without approval from the city and an appropriate license. 
(d)  In vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume while driving or operating any vehicle on any public road or street any alcoholic beverage in any open or unsealed original container or cup, can, bottle or other open or unsealed container. 
Sec. 4-77. - Penalty. 
(a)  In addition to any penalty for violation imposed pursuant to chapter 1, or state or federal law, any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full including penalties. 
(b)  Fees, fines and penalties shall be established by the city council and kept on record in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 114.999; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Secs. 4-78—4-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-100. - Levied; amount; payment; duties of dealers and wholesalers; unlawful sales and deliveries; bonds; penalties. 
(a)  Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon the sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon the sale of alcoholic beverages within the incorporated area of the city an excise tax, to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Amount of tax. The excise taxes on alcoholic beverages shall be three percent. 
(c)  Computation, payment, duties of wholesale dealer or distributor. The taxes imposed in this section shall be computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages or fermented wine to any retail dealer in the incorporated area of the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on the business: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the city, such records to be kept for a period of one year for malt beverages and fermented wine and to be made available upon request to any duly authorized representative of the city; 
(2)  Collect from each such retail dealer in the city at the time of delivery of the malt beverages and fermented wine the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and to hold such amount in trust for the city until such amount is remitted to the city as provided in this section; and 
(3)  Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81 or other applicable state law, on or before the 20th day of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the city finance office, which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of malt beverages and fermented wine to or for retail dealers in the incorporated area of the city for the month immediately preceding such report. Such report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this section, and such other information as may be called for by the city. This report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(d)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer or distributor. If any wholesaler dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the report provided for in this section, the city shall notify the party in writing; and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of notice, the city may revoke the wholesale dealer's or distributor's license. In addition, such a wholesaler shall pay a late payment charge of ten percent per month for each month of delinquency together with interest on the total amount due (including late payment fee) equal to one percent per month. 
(e)  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell at retail within the limits of the incorporated area of the city any malt beverages or fermented wine on which the taxes provided for in this section have not been paid. This section shall also apply to farm wineries. 
(f)  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any malt beverages or fermented wine to any retail dealer in the city without collecting the taxes provided for in this section at the time of delivery. 
(g)  Posting of bonds. Each wholesaler dealer or distributor who sells malt beverages or fermented wines to retail dealers in the incorporated area of the city shall post a bond as determined by the city manager shall comply with every provision and make payment of any sums due under this section. If the wholesaler's license shall be revoked for cause, the bond shall be forfeited and paid to the city. 
(h)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or who shall assist any retail dealer in malt beverages or fermented wines in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes provided for in this section shall be punished, and shall also be subject to having his license revoked. 
(i)  Farm wineries. Wines sold at retail by a farm winery shall have levied thereon the excise tax that applies to wholesalers. Farm wineries shall prepare and keep accurate records as to what is sold at retail and what is sold at wholesale for a period of one year. 
(Code 2004, § 114.007; Ord. No. 1716, 11-27-2017) 
Sec. 4-101. - Malt beverage excise tax; imposition. 
There is imposed and levied an excise tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages within the city limits as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15.5 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15.5 gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-41; Code 2004, § 36.35) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 4-102. - Wine excise tax; imposition. 
In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the governing authority on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the incorporated area of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-42; Code 2004, § 36.36) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-103. - Markings; tax additional to license fees. 
(a)  No decal, stamp, or other identifying markings shall be required on malt beverages and wine sold within the city. 
(b)  The excise taxes provided for herein shall be in addition to any license fee. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-43; Code 2004, § 36.37; Ord. No. 236, 4-14-1975) 
Sec. 4-104. - Report and remittance. 
Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages and/or wine within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month listing the total amount of malt beverages and wine, by size and container, sold during the preceding month to dealers within the city. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city manager by the tenth of the month following the calendar month in which sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-44; Code 2004, § 36.38) 
Sec. 4-105. - Retailers' records. 
All retail dealers in malt beverages and/or wine, and all persons selling malt beverages and/or wine at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of malt beverages and wine, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages or wine to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of the beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. The invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchase shall be kept a period of at least three years from the date of the purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-45; Code 2004, § 36.39) 
Sec. 4-106. - Penalty for failure to report; false reports. 
A penalty of five percent of the amount of the monthly remittance shall be charged for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-46; Code 2004, § 36.40; Ord. No. 236, 4-14-1975) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate city is designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest; provided, however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the mayor and city council, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under the supervision of the police department, in numbers and in the manner as is deemed advisable by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game in the city except by order of the chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-1; Code 2004, § 93.01) 
Sec. 6-2. - Fowl or livestock running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic fowl or livestock to allow that domestic fowl or livestock to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-2; Code 2004, § 93.02) 
Sec. 6-3. - Enclosures for animals and fowl. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-3; Code 2004, § 93.03) 
Secs. 6-4—6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 6-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dog means dogs of either sex, unless otherwise specified. 
Inoculated means the administration by a licensed veterinarian of a rabies vaccine, which has been approved by the state department of human resources. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-11; Code 2004, § 93.20; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-26. - License required; evidence of inoculation required. 
Every person owning or harboring a dog within the corporate limits of the city shall be required, on or before January 15 in each year, to apply to the city manager for a license for each dog so owned or harbored, and at the time of application shall present and file with the city manager a certificate signed by either a licensed veterinarian of the state or some properly qualified person approved by the state department of human resources, showing that the dog has been inoculated against rabies and that the inoculation is effective for the year for which application for a license is sought. Whereupon, after the payment of the fee hereinafter set forth, the city manager shall issue to the person a license together with an official tag, which tag shall be fastened to the collar of the dog so licensed. In the event of a dog being acquired after January 15, a license shall be obtained as aforesaid within one month after the date of acquiring the animal. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-12; Code 2004, § 93.21; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-27. - Penalty for delinquent applications. 
For any application made 30 days after January 15, the applicant shall be assessed a penalty of 50 percent of the license fee, which amount shall be added and collected with the regular license fee. The aforesaid penalty is not applicable in the event the animal is acquired after January 15. In this event, the above stated penalty will be enforced at the expiration of 30 days after the last date for licensing the animal as set forth in section 6-26. The penalty provided herein is in addition to any penalty for a Code violation as may be provided in chapter 1. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-13; Code 2004, § 93.22; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-28. - Transfer of license. 
If there is a change in ownership of a dog during the license year, the new owner may have the current license transferred to his name upon the payment to the city manager of the transfer fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-14; Code 2004, § 93.23; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-29. - Unauthorized use of license. 
No person shall use for any dog a license receipt or license tag issued for another dog. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-15; Code 2004, § 93.24; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-30. - License fee; expiration. 
The fee for obtaining the license required by section 6-26 shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council. The license shall expire on December 31 of the year obtained. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-16; Code 2004, § 93.25; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-31. - Replacement of lost tags. 
If any tag required by the preceding sections is lost or destroyed, the owner, on making affidavit of the loss before the city manager and paying a replacement fee, shall be issued a replacement tag, and the lost tag shall be noted on the city manager 's register and a list of the lost numbers shall be reported to and kept by the chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-17; Code 2004, § 93.26; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-32. - Impoundment of dogs without tags. 
Every police officer shall have the authority to seize and impound, or cause to be seized and impounded, any dog at large within the corporate limits of the city not bearing a tag as provided in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-18; Code 2004, § 93.27; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-33. - Redemption of impounded dogs; redemption fee. 
The owner of or person harboring a dog which has been seized or impounded as provided in this article shall be entitled to redeem the dog upon establishing his title thereto to the satisfaction of the person designated by the county board of health to have charge of the animal and the paying to the city manager of a redemption fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-19; Code 2004, § 93.28; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-34. - Notification of owner of impoundment; disposition of unredeemed dogs. 
Any dog seized and impounded shall be detained for a period of 48 hours. If the dog is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or by the person harboring the dog within a period of 48 hours, it shall be disposed of in the manner and by the person as the county board of health names or designates; provided, that whenever the name of any person appears on the collar of any dog so seized, the person shall forthwith be notified by the city manager within ten days of the seizure in writing by post card, addressed to him and deposited in the United States mail. The party shall have ten days from the notice to redeem the dog. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-20; Code 2004, § 93.29; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-35. - Interference with enforcing officers; removal of tags. 
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized or empowered to perform any duty with reference to dogs under this chapter; nor shall any person attach a license tag to any dog to which it was not issued or remove a license tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of its owner. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-21; Code 2004, § 93.30; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-36. - Pickup and boarding fee. 
Any person desirous of redeeming any dog after proof of ownership pursuant to the above provisions shall pay a fine as an expense for catching the dog and an additional fine as a boarding fee for keeping the dog after being seized by the authority above-mentioned. The fines shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-23; Code 2004, § 93.32) 
Sec. 6-37. - Keeping of barking dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep within the corporate limits of the city any dog which, by barking, biting, howling, or in any other manner, disturbs the quiet of any person. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-24; Code 2004, § 93.33; Ord. No. 241, 10-11-1976) 
Sec. 6-38. - Leash law. 
(a)  Every dog within the city shall be either kept on a leash or kept within a fence or other area which confines the dog to a limited area. Any dog found roaming in the streets shall be forthwith seized by the proper authority and the owner shall be subject to the fine as provided by this article, pursuant to the above sections. 
(b)  The city manager, at his discretion, may elect not to impound a dog or other animal found in violation of this section, but to issue or cause to be issued a summons directed to the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the municipal court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9-3-25; Code 2004, § 93.34) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, vocational calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly, provided that this shall not include any business, trade, profession and the like which are licensed by the state unless the city is allowed by the laws of the state to require a business tax certificate, nor shall it include any business operated solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
Engaged in business means any person when he performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including sales or services of the character as made by a wholesale or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator, or agent in any business within the city. 
(Code 2004, § 111.01; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-2. - Businesses to which this chapter has limited applicability. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq., except to the provisions of article IV of this chapter; 
(6)  Those businesses exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls); 
(7)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(8)  Depository financial institutions upon which the license fee is limited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(9)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust upon which the license fee is limited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 2004, § 112.09; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-3. - Business tax certificates required. 
Every business in the city or person doing business or engaged in business within the city that has not purchased a business tax certificate from another taxing jurisdiction is hereby required to have a business tax certificate from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession, or occupation within the corporate limits, unless the city is prohibited under state law from requiring the business, profession, or occupation from obtaining a business tax certificate or the activity is exempted by this chapter or the ordinance governing occupation, profession, and business taxes. 
(Code 2004, § 111.02; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-4. - Separate businesses. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location, or place, each store, location, or place shall be considered a separate business under the provisions of this chapter and a separate business tax certificate shall be required. 
(Code 2004, § 111.03; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-5. - Application; fee; temporary business. 
Every person required to procure a business tax certificate as required in the preceding sections and every person required to obtain a business license as required by article III of this chapter, shall submit an application for the business tax certificate to the city manager, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provision of this Code. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted before April 1 of each year or within ten days of opening a new business or re-opening a business under new ownership. 
(2)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind and class of business to be conducted; 
d.  Name and home address of partnership if conducted as a partnership; 
e.  Name and home address of the officers and directors if a corporation; 
f.  Any information as may be required by the city manager for the purpose of determining the amount of any occupation taxes to be collected under this Code; and 
g.  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter which may include, but is not limited to, a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state, or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, by a partner, if a partnership, and by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the city, shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter and the city's occupation, profession, and business taxes. 
(5)  False statements on any application shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the business tax certificate or denial of the application. 
(6)  Any administrative fee as may be fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council for business tax certificates required under this section shall accompany the application. 
(Code 2004, § 111.04; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-6. - Duration of business tax certificates. 
Any business tax certificate and business licenses referred to in this chapter shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(Code 2004, § 111.06; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-7. - Exemption of personal activity. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, nothing herein contained shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity in commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets only and are not the principle occupation of the individual, to obtain a business tax certificate and pay a fee therefor. 
(Code 2004, § 111.07; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-8. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed application, and after review by the city manager regarding the applicable requirements and criteria, the city manager shall issue the tax certificate and business licenses, where applicable, which shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city manager. 
(b)  No business tax certificate shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
(c)  No business tax certificate or business license shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including, but not limited to, property taxes, business taxes, utility bills and any other taxes, assessments, or fees. 
(d)  If the city manager determines that the application is not in order or any requirements for the business tax certificate or business license have not been met then the city manager shall deny the application and immediately provide written notice of the denial and the grounds therefor to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the mayor and city council within ten days of the denial notice being issued. The mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within ten days of the appeal being filed with the city manager. The mayor and city council, within ten days of the hearing, may order the business tax certificate and business licenses granted with or without conditions or may affirm the denial of the application. The decision shall be based only upon a finding by the mayor and city council that the city manager was correct or erred in the interpretation of the regulations involved or the facts of the case. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all business tax certificates and business licenses applications shall be approved or disapproved within ten days of filing with the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 111.08; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-9. - Display of certificates and license. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all business tax certificates and licenses issued to them under this Code in some conspicuous place of their business establishment at which address the certificate or license was issued. Any transient or nonresident person, firm or corporation doing business within the city shall carry the certificate or license either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business, and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Code 2004, § 111.09; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-10. - Renewal of certificate. 
Each grantee of a business tax certificate shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the city manager no later than April 1 of each calendar year, which application may require substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Code 2004, § 111.10; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-11. - Revocation; suspension. 
The mayor and city council after affording the grantee of a business tax certificate or license five days' notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings may, if it finds this Code, or any state or federal law, to have been violated by the grantee, his agent or employee in the operation of the business, may revoke any and all city certificates or licenses in their entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the grantee on probation or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and city council may deem necessary after a hearing thereon. 
(Code 2004, § 111.11; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-12. - Change of address. 
Any person who is granted a business tax certificate hereunder when moving from one location to another shall notify the city manager of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the city manager no later than the day of moving. The same business tax certificate or license will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning and building regulations of the city and any other location transfer requirements of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 111.12; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-13. - Transfer of certificates. 
Business tax certificates and business licenses shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. In the event that the owner of a business holding a currently valid paid up business tax certificate should sell or transfer the business to another person, the purchaser of the business shall obtain free of charge a new business tax certificate in his name for the balance of the current term of the seller's business tax certificate, upon making application to the city manager, and the purchaser shall be punishable for violation of this chapter if the transfer of the business tax certificate provided for in this section is not made before the transferee begins to engage in the business. At the date of renewal of the seller's business tax certificate, the buyer must obtain a new annual business tax certificate and pay all fees and business taxes required by this Code and comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and all ordinances in the same manner as if he had been the original owner of the business. Business licenses shall be transferrable only as provided by this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 111.13; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-14. - Issuance of replacement certificates. 
In the event that the city manager is notified that the grantee of a business tax certificate and business license has lost his copy of the certificate or licenses, he shall make a new copy, upon a showing by the grantee that the required fees have been paid. In addition, the grantee shall be charged a replacement fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council. Replacement business tax certificates and business licenses shall be signed by the city manager and shall indicate the time and date upon which issued. The possession of a replacement certificate or license shall not be a defense to any charge or violation of this chapter except a charge made after the time of the issuance of the replacement certificate. 
(Code 2004, § 111.14; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-15. - Special provisions for disabled veterans and legally blind. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, any person who is legally blind and all disabled veterans desiring to enter business without paying city fees or business taxes must present a state disability license to the city manager whereupon a city business tax certificate will be issued and marked "FREE" on the face of the same. 
(Code 2004, § 111.15; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-16. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purposes. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the grounds that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to the purpose. 
(Code 2004, § 112.32; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-17. - Evidence of state registration; display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before a city business tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2004, § 112.33; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-18. - Evidence of qualification. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business tax certificate, show evidence that the requirements have been met. 
(Code 2004, § 112.34; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-19. - Violations; defense. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, to transact any business of a type for which this chapter requires a certificate, or to carry on any business for which a certificate is required, however briefly or however transitorily, without first obtaining a certificate to do so, under the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, made liable for obtaining a business tax certificate under this chapter, to fail to show the certificate or a copy thereof to any police officer within a reasonable time after the making of a demand therefor by the police officer. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this Code to fail to pay any administrative, regulatory or other fees required by this chapter by the date on which the payments are due. 
(b)  Defense to prosecution. It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this chapter for failing to obtain a business tax certificate before engaging in business that a certificate has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. It shall be presumed that no certificate has been issued unless, at his trial, the accused produces in court his currently valid business tax certificate or a certified copy thereof. In no event shall the claim by the accused that he has been issued a currently valid business tax certificate which has been lost be sustained unless that person shall have first reported the alleged loss to the city manager and made demand for the issuance of a new certificate. The report of loss or demand for issuance of a replacement certificate must have been made prior to the arrest for the violation for which the accused is charged. 
(c)  Owner and manager both punishable for violations. In the event that a business is being conducted without a business tax certificate, both the person owning the business and the person in charge of the management of the business in the city may be held liable for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction, either or both may be punished as provided for in this section. 
(Code 2004, § 111.98; Ord. No. 330, 12-31-1994) 
Secs. 8-20—8-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-42—8-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 8-71. - Registration required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this division. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-1; Code 2004, § 113.01) 
Sec. 8-72. - Registration fees; application for identification card. 
Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city manager or his designated representative a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council and shall make application with the city manager for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-2; Code 2004, § 113.02) 
Sec. 8-73. - Exhibition of registration card. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-3; Code 2004, § 113.03) 
Sec. 8-74. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. 
(1)  Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows: "NO SOLICITORS INVITED." 
(2)  The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within the travel lanes or in any other way which impedes the safe flow of traffic or create a safety hazard. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the city manager in accordance with this division or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1985, § 7-2-4; Code 2004, § 113.04) 
Secs. 8-75—8-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 8-92. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments as defined herein, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, and on its citizens and property, and on the character and preservation of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This division is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This division is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This division is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Floyd County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton, Georgia; Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Bartow County, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences are believed to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and city council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed within the city limits of the city and prohibiting the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in said establishments is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this division is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Code 2004, § 115.01; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means the premises on which defined establishments operate and on which defined activities occur shall constitute adult entertainment establishments. Adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to: 
Adult bookstore means a business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
a.  Any business or establishment which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; 
b.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult businesses include, but are not specifically limited to, the following: 
Adult dancing establishment means a business or establishment that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means a business or establishment that is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein, including a business or establishment wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means a business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of reproduced materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bath house or massage parlor means a business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means a business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a business or establishment including, but not limited to, a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship; a body of congregants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; congregation, or organization assembled for religious purposes. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, pleas of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Distance and measurement means the measurement of linear feet from the nearest point of the property line of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the property line of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal considerations or otherwise. Independent contractors whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or other services to patrons, including, but not limited to, dancers and waitresses, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees. 
Good moral character means, although not limited to, having no convictions of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within the previous five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location, and boundaries, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Park means any land or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by county, city, state or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boarding or roominghouse, duplex, or other multifamily housing, used as a dwelling for humans, or any properties owned therefor. 
School means a state, county, city, church, school, or other school, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and daycare centers for persons of any age. 
Specified sexual activities mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; sodomy, cunnilingus, fellatio, pedophilia, lesbianism, homosexuality; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of a human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron; 
(5)  Sexually oriented torture; or 
(6)  Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
Specified anatomical areas mean any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Code 2004, § 115.02; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005; Am. Ord. No. 479, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 8-94. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments as described herein and located within the city: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any zoning district, other than the industrial district on at least one acre and within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of a parcel of land upon which any single-family or multifamily residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for single-family or multifamily uses or purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmentally owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, playground, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in said establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to this division. 
(5)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, dates of birth, photograph, and Social Security numbers of all employees. 
(6)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, on Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(7)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except for separate office, kitchens, restrooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(8)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connection or doors with any other place of business. 
(9)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated such that the activity on the interior of the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted in or on the premises. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to expose for public view his specified anatomical areas in a lewd or obscene fashion. 
(13)  Every act or omission of an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this division shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. 
(14)  No licensee shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, breasts, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. All public signs or other forms of advertisement shall comply with this requirement. 
(Code 2004, § 115.03; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-95. - Additional regulations. 
The following additional regulations apply to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, and lingerie modeling studios (herein "adult dance establishments") as described herein: 
(1)  All live dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(2)  All live dancing or entertainment shall occur no closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(3)  No dancer, entertainer or employee shall fondle or caress any patron nor allow any patron to fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
(4)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(5)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron nor allow any patron to directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3½ footcandles per square foot. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit any employee to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the specified sexual activities described in this division. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit an employee to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(9)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit a male employee to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated sexual activity with another person. 
(13)  No licensee shall permit an employee to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs or body of a patron therein. 
(14)  No licensee shall permit or allow a patron to participate in any act or activity upon the licensed premises which an employee is prohibited from performing. 
(Code 2004, § 115.04; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-96. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city limits, any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this division, without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 2004, § 115.05; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-97. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this division, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 2004, § 115.06; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-98. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to or with the city manager or his designee. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee, in an amount established by the mayor and city council, shall be paid to the city manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this division and related laws, applicable provisions of this division and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(d)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and/or revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Harlem, Georgia." 
(e)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)  Where the applicant: 
(1)  Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation; 
(2)  Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the partnership; 
(3)  Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and if not, then to the sole proprietor or a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor; 
(4)  For purposes of this division, the term "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership. 
(Code 2004, § 115.07; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-99. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the city manager. Such application shall state the name, address, Social Security number and date of birth of the applicant; and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(b)  The previous addresses, if any, of the applicant for the period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence for each. 
(c)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(d)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within six months prior to the application. 
(e)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(f)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, addresses, dates of birth and Social Security numbers of each of its current officers and directors as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, dates of birth and Social Security numbers of the partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(g)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(h)  The name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(i)  A plat, filed in triplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing all structures and the location of the proposed premises which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 8-94(3). 
(j)  The name, address, Social Security number and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(k)  Any other information reasonably required by the city manager in order to verify the information furnished by the applicant to obtain the license. Should the requirements of this division dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for and a license issue to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of the city to act as agent for all applicant licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this division. Proof of delivery to the agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee of such notice, process or information. 
(l)  Each application must be complete in its entirely before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(m)  All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish, in triplicate, plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. Any premises to be constructed or renovated prior to opening shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The premises shall comply with all building, health and similar city codes. 
(n)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2004, § 115.08; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-100. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder, except for applications for renewals of current licenses, shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the mayor and city council in the newspaper in which city legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 40 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(b)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the city manager on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(c)  Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the city manager, prior to the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which said notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: 

 
The sign shall be a least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks, or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2004, § 115.09; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-101. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The city manager shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, to investigate the application and the background of the applicant following the acceptance and filing of the completed application. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and city council may, upon two hearings, grant the license if the mayor and city council find: 
(1)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(3)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(4)  The applicant, (if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership,) has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partner if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked in this county or any other local governmental jurisdiction located within this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this division and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(8)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the above, no license shall be issued to an applicant if, within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application, the same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this division applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(10)  An annual license fee, established by resolution of the city and prorated on a calendar month basis, is paid to the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 115.10; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-102. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment license shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Code 2004, § 115.11; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-103. - License non-transferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the city manager. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2004, § 115.12; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-104. - Change of location. 
No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Code 2004, § 115.13; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-105. - Change of name. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(Code 2004, § 115.14; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-106. - Modification of licensed premises. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building within the premises, customer entry locations, or other changes shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 115.15; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-107. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at the location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state, the city or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976). 
(Code 2004, § 115.16; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-108. - Suspension; revocation; appeal; service of notice. 
(a)  Suspension. The city manager shall suspend a license for a period of 180 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has violated any sections of this division. If the city manager deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the city manager's notification unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and city council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the city manager. A hearing by the mayor and city council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  The city manager shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(2)  The city manager shall also revoke a license if he determines that: 
a.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the materials submitted during the application process. 
b.  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
c.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act prohibited by this division to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
d.  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(3)  If the city manager deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the city manager's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and city council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the city manager. A hearing by the mayor and city council on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the mayor and city council. Revocation shall continue for 12 consecutive months from the date the revocation becomes effective. 
(c)  Appeal procedure. An applicant or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the mayor and city council as allowed by this division shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and city council. At the time set for the hearing, the mayor and city council shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from the city staff or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this division, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The city manager shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)  The mayor and city council shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specification as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: the city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the charged party shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The charged party and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the mayor and city council may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(d)  Service of notice. 
(1)  Any notice required to be given under this division to any applicant, licensee or employee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the city manager. Notices mailed as described above shall be deemed received on the third day subsequent to their deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the city manager in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Code 2004, § 115.18; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 8-109. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No person who has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later offense occurring within any 24-month period, shall be employed by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  No person who is convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the above-noted crimes while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this division for the applicable time described above. 
(3)  Application for permit shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the city manager. Such application shall state the name, address, Social Security number and date of birth of the applicant, the name and address of the employer, the name and address of the place of employment and any other information reasonably required by the city manager in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a permit, including a set of fingerprints on regular sheriff's department or United States Department of Justice forms. 
(b)  Approval for employment. 
(1)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment shall be required for all employees thereof. 
(2)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee to and obtains a work permit from the city manager. The city manager shall immediately issue said permit upon the filing of an application and payment of the fee, which permit shall be conditional and subject to revocation upon the determination by the city manager following investigation of the applicant that the applicant is not qualified to be an employee under this division. Upon such determination the city manager shall notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final and revocation shall become effective unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and city council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the city manager. A hearing by the mayor and city council the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. A nonrefundable annual fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, shall be paid to the city manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment to file with the city manager the names of all employees with their home addresses, home telephone numbers, dates of birth, Social Security numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the city manager within three days from the date of any change. 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, independent contractors shall be deemed employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this division shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Code 2004, § 115.19; Ord. No. 376, 11-14-2005) 
Secs. 8-110—8-131. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 8-132. - Purpose. 
(a)  The general purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by requiring that new and existing mobile food vendors provide residents and customers with a level of cleanliness, quality and safety. 
(b)  It is also the intent of this division to establish reasonable guidelines and restrictions for mobile food vendors in relationship to established restaurant businesses and ensure the safe and convenient use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2004, § 116.01; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissary means an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle in which pre-packaged ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. The term "ice cream truck" shall not include vendors who prepare ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind. 
Mobile food vendor means a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to prepare and serve food. 
Pushcart means a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
Temporary food establishment means a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Code 2004, § 116.02; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-134. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment vendor, ice cream truck, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a license first having been granted under this section, except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(b)  An application for a license or a permit hereunder shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this division. The city manager or his designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this division. 
(c)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor, or pushcart permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Make, model, and license plate number of vending unit; 
(3)  Owner's contact information; 
(4)  Operator's contact information; 
(5)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(6)  Copy of approved permit from the county health department; 
(7)  List of operating locations and times; 
(8)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property; and 
(9)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(d)  The following information shall be provided with each application for an ice cream truck permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Owner's contact information; 
(3)  Operator's contact information; 
(4)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(5)  Copy of approved permit from the state department of agriculture; 
(6)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property, if applicable; and 
(7)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(Code 2004, § 116.03; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-135. - Prohibited conduct and requirements. 
(a)  Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor shall conduct business or operate in the public right-of-way except as part of a city-sponsored or -sanctioned special event. 
(b)  Operation from private property. 
(1)  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior written consent of the owner. 
(2)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, mobile food vendors are permitted on a given property no more than five days in any calendar month. A minimum of two calendar days must transpire between operating periods on any given property. 
(3)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, no more than two mobile food vendors may operate on any single property at any one time. 
(4)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, mobile food vendors may occupy no more than ten percent of the designated parking spaces on a given property, and at no time shall the operation of a mobile food vendor reduce the number of parking spaces on a property below the minimum required by city code or ordinance. 
(5)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(c)  A mobile food vendor who prepares food shall maintain a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the mobile food vendor and the public from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advance written notice to the city. 
(d)  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor, ice cream truck, or pushcart shall be in compliance with the city noise ordinance. 
(e)  The license under which a mobile food vendor, ice cream truck, or pushcart is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the mobile food vendor or pushcart at all times. 
(f)  Any driver of a mobile food vendor or ice cream truck motorized vehicle must possess a valid state driver's license. 
(g)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendors are allowed only in commercial zoning districts, except as part of a special event sponsored by a homeowners' association or similar official neighborhood organization. 
(h)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk, or ten feet of any driveway except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(i)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 200 feet of any existing food service establishment except as part of a city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(j)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 200 feet of any city-sponsored or sanctioned special event. 
(k)  Except as may be allowed as part of a city-issued special event permit, a mobile food vendor may operate from any given property or within any given city block only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and/or 10:30 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. 
(l)  No sale or offer for sale of ice cream, frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products shall be made from a mobile food vendor unless each side of the vehicle is marked, in letters and numbers at least three inches in height, with the name and address of the mobile food vendor licensee. 
(m)  The mobile food vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
(n)  Except as otherwise allowed and described within this section, a mobile food vendor must operate from a motorized, wheeled vehicle that may lawfully be driven upon streets and roadways within the state. 
(1)  The owner of a licensed restaurant located within the city may, with a valid city mobile food vendor permit, engage in mobile food vending from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle as an ancillary location of said restaurant, provided that all other provisions of this division are met and adhered to. 
(2)  As allowed by a city-issued special event permit, a mobile food vendor that holds a valid Harlem mobile food vendor permit may operate from a wheeled mobile trailer, pushcart, or motorized vehicle. 
(o)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this division or used for mobile retail food establishments: 
(1)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
(2)  Every self-propelled vehicle shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(p)  The mobile food vendor may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. 
(Code 2004, § 116.04; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-136. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the city, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(Code 2004, § 116.05; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-137. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the right to suspend or revoke a mobile food vendor license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city manager seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the city manager shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violations for which cause the action is being taken. 
(b)  The city manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application or renewal process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed a violation of this mobile food vendor division to occur or did not make a reasonable effort to prevent any such occurrence; or 
(3)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, or other amount of money due to the city under this division or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event that the city manager determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation occurring within any consecutive 12-month period, the license shall be suspended for 90 days. Any license that has been suspended two times within any consecutive 12-month period that is determined to have committed a subsequent license violation with 24 months of the second suspension shall be revoked; provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. Should a license be revoked, the owner and/or operator shall not be eligible to apply for a mobile food vendor license for a period of three years from the date of revocation. 
(d)  In the event of a revocation by the city manager, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten business days from the date of the effective date of the written notice received by the licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city manager may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee on appeal to the mayor and city council. The city manager's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city manager's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. 
(e)  When an appeal is received, the mayor and city council shall, within ten business days from the date on which the notice of appeal is received, take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date before the mayor and city council and the city manager to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  The city council may appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place of hearing. The city manager shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice as may be required by law. In either event, the hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of the city manager's action, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the city manager. 
(f)  The mayor and city council, or assigned hearing officer, may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city manager. The decision of the mayor and city council or hearing officer shall be final. 
(Code 2004, § 116.06; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-138. - Fees. 
The fee for every application for license under this section shall be set by the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 116.07; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Secs. 8-139—8-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 8-160. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business tax certificate means the document issued by the city clerk of the city to a business, corporation, or profession which gives evidence of compliance with the requirements of this article and payment of a business tax for the year along with any other required fees. 
Development impact fees means as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development that are not regulatory fees. 
Dominant business activity means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who, by state law, requires state licensure regulating the profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Code 2004, § 112.01; Ord. No. 329, 12-31-1994) 
Sec. 8-161. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade, or calling. 
Sec. 8-162. - When tax due and payable. 
(a)  All taxes imposed and assessed in this article shall be due and payable on or before April 1 of each year except in the case of any business commenced or under new ownership after that date. The taxes on a business shall be due and payable within ten days of the date the business has commenced or re-opened under new ownership. The tax for new business shall be prorated by quarters, provided that no tax shall be less than $10.00. Payment of the tax may be made personally to the city clerk in cash or by check, money order, bank draft, certified check, or cashier's check payable to the city. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 2004, § 112.31; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-163. - Occupation tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for the business, trade, profession, or occupation. 
(Code 2004, § 112.02; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-164. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the following criteria: the number of employees which a business, occupation or profession employs in the given calendar year. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule shall be as follows. Business tax amounts, exclusive of administrative and regulatory fees, shall be paid annually in accordance with the following schedule depending on the number of employees. 

 
(Code 2004, § 112.04; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-165. - Paying occupation tax on business with no location in city. 
Any business with no location in the city but which conducts business within the city will be required to purchase a business tax certificate unless the business possesses a business tax certificate from another taxing jurisdiction to which the business pays an occupational tax. 
(Code 2004, § 112.05; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-166. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax. Where a person conducts more than one business at a fixed location, the dominant business activity only shall be issued a certificate and taxed. 
(Code 2004, § 112.07; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-167. - Practitioners. 
(a)  Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18 shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax which corresponds with the applicable number of employees of the individual professional; or 
(2)  A fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, the tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by November 15 of each year. 
(c)  Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a business tax certificate or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2004, § 112.08; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-168. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where the levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 2004, § 112.10; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-169. - Administration. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment, and collection of the fees, taxes and penalties imposed herein in accordance with this article and the remaining provisions of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 112.11; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-170. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. The exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Code 2004, § 112.13; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-171. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2004, § 112.15; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-172. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using the returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Code 2004, § 112.36; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-173. - Inspection of books and records. 
(a)  In any case the city manager, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city manager shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and, upon demand of the city manager, the books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit the books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city manager at his discretion. 
(b)  If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurred as a result of under-reporting, a penalty will be assessed in the amount of: 
(1)  One percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid pursuant to O.C.G.A § 48-2-40; and 
(2)  Ten percent on all taxes due over 90 days pursuant to O.C.G.A §§ 48-2-40 through 48-2-43, 48-13-6 and 48-13-21. 
(Code 2004, § 112.37; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Sec. 8-174. - Refunds. 
(a)  If a business ceases operation within a year for which a business tax certificate has been issued and the fees and taxes for same have been paid in full, the fees and taxes paid shall be refundable in proportion to the number of months remaining in the year. 
(b)  Where a business operates under a business tax certificate for less than three months in a calendar year and ceases operation, an administrative fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, shall be deducted from the refund to cover the administrative cost associated with the issuance of the certificate and the processing of the cancellation and refund. 
(Code 2004, § 112.38; Ord. No. 329, 12-21-1994) 
Secs. 8-175—8-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS 

Sec. 8-208. - License fees on insurers. 
(a)  There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule. For each separate business location, in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, operating on behalf of the insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and that, in connection with the loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this article, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this article is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state, in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this article, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this article is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(f)  Administrative provisions. The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Code 2004, §§ 110.01, 116.06; Ord. No. 354, 12-10-2001; Am. Ord. No. 443, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Sec. 8-209. - Fees. 
The fee for every application for license under this section shall be set by city council. 
(Code 2004, § 116.07; Ord. No. 1801, 2-26-2018) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local organization for emergency management required, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27 

Sec. 10-19. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for the carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-1; Code 2004, § 37.01; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Sec. 10-20. - Office of city deputy emergency management coordinator. 
(a)  In agreement with the governing officials, there is established the city emergency management office. The mayor, with the concurrence of other city officials, shall appoint a deputy coordinator of emergency management for the city. 
(b)  When appointed, the deputy coordinator shall be on the staff of the county emergency management director/coordinator and is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on all matters pertaining to civil preparedness; 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations; 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city departments and agencies, an emergency preparedness plan for emergency functions set forth in section 10-19. The preparedness plans will be in support and in consonance with the county emergency operations and disaster plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the city and thence to the county emergency management director/coordinator for approval; 
(4)  To render the reports as planning, activities and the like as required by governing officials and the county director/coordinator in keeping with good programming; 
(5)  To coordinate the activities of the city department heads during a declared emergency and in support of the county emergency management operations and disaster plan. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-2; Code 2004, § 37.02; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Sec. 10-21. - Emergency management organization. 
(a)  The city emergency management organization shall be established around existing city departments and agencies and the emergency functions listed in section 10-19 are assigned as follows: 

 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plans and SOPs for their assigned functions. The plans and SOPs will be submitted through the city deputy coordinator to the mayor and city council for approval and thence to the county director/coordinator. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-3; Code 2004, § 37.03; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Sec. 10-22. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor and city council may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for the period as the state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all city emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute any property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city, and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for the property or supplies; 
(4)  To perform and exercise the other functions and duties and take the emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-4; Code 2004, § 37.04; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Sec. 10-23. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in the emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-5; Code 2004, § 37.05; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Sec. 10-24. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 3-3-7; Code 2004, § 37.06; Ord. No. 231, 8-12-1974) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER CONSERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Water conservation plan adopted by reference. 
The comprehensive water conservation plan, set forth in Ordinance No. 316, adopted May 13, 1991, is adopted by reference and included as a part of this Code as if set out full herein. 
(Code 2004, § 53.01; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. No. 346, 6-15-2000) 
Sec. 12-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 2004, § 53.02; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 12-21. - Construction restrictions. 
(a)  No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  No construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when the repair or renovation of or addition to the existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 2004, § 53.03; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 12-22. - Exemptions. 
New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 12-20 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within the existing buildings; 
(2)  When the plumbing or sewage system within the existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  The system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in the individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles; 
(5)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee, as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of the exemption. 
(Code 2004, § 53.04; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 12-23. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 53.05; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Secs. 12-24—12-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 12-52. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plants, seeds, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this division. 
(2)  The city manager shall be the enforcement authorities for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(Code 2004, § 53.07; Ord. No. 440, 12-20-2010) 
Secs. 12-53—12-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 12-83. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Regulations." 
(Code 2004, § 53.20; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-84. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within the zones. 
(Code 2004, § 53.21; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-85. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Code 2004, § 53.22; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-86. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 250 feet. 
(Code 2004, § 53.23; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-87. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 2004, § 53.24; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-88. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not the use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 12-87. 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 12-87; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Code 2004, § 53.25; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Sec. 12-89. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this division, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 2004, § 53.26; Ord. No. 360, 5-12-2003) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 14-1. - Storage of explosives and blasting agents, flammable liquids, and liquefied petroleum gases restricted. 
The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the fire prevention code hereby adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred to in section 16.22a of the code hereby adopted in which storage of Class I liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in section 21.6a of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: only the areas as may be specifically designated by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-24; Code 2004, § 91.04; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 14-2. - Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
The routes referred to in section 12.70 of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established as follows: U.S. Highway 278 and all other routes as may be established by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-25; Code 2004, § 91.05; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 14-3. - Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
The routes referred to in section 20.14 of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: U.S. Highway 278 and all other routes as may be established by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-26; Code 2004, § 91.06; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 14-4. - Establishment of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use. 
The fire lanes referred to in section 28.16 of the fire prevention code are hereby established as follows: the fire lanes as shall be designated by the chief of the fire department and by the chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-27; Code 2004, § 91.07; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 14-5. - Modifications. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law or regulation, the chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-28; Code 2004, § 91.08; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Sec. 14-6. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the mayor and city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1985, § 3-2-29; Code 2004, § 91.09; Ord. No. 224, 6-12-1972) 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for city to abate a public nuisance; O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; jurisdiction for nuisance abatements with municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; unfit structures and health hazards abatement procedure, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; definitions related to nuisance structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; additionally, unless otherwise provided for herein, the terms defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq., shall be applicable to this chapter. 
Abandoned means an article of machinery, appliance, vehicle article of equipment and other material shall be deemed to have been abandoned or discarded when it has remained upon the property in an inoperable condition for more than ten days; or when it has become inoperable and the owner does not intend to repair it and place it back into operation. 
Abandoned vehicle means one that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power. It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle has been abandoned if the owner or person in possession of said vehicle cannot furnish satisfactory evidence that the motor vehicle license fee required by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated has been paid and that the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act has been complied with as respects said motor vehicle. 
Appliance means any type of machine or device used in and about the home or premises, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, refrigerators, iceboxes, freezers, stoves, washing machines, clothes dryers, television sets, radio sets, lawn mowers, and other devices of like nature. 
Dismantler means any person removing, replacing, disassembling major component parts of any type of motor vehicles, for any period of time. 
Garbage means organic waste matter, including, but not limited to, waste matter from houses, kitchens, restaurants, hotels, hospitals and other such places, and it comprises chiefly of food waste. Garbage does not include moisture that may be drained in the sewer or human body wastes. 
Junk means any old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, radiator, debris or waste; junk, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof; or iron, steel, and any other crap ferrous or nonferrous material; or any abandoned or discarded machinery, appliance, vehicle, equipment or material of any description or kind whatsoever. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, storing, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such acts are to be used for charity. 
Major component part means one of the following subassemblies of a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Front clip assembly (fenders, grille, and hood); 
(2)  Rear clip assembly (quarter panels and floor panel assembly); 
(3)  Engine and transmission; 
(4)  Top assembly, with the exception of soft tops; 
(5)  Frame or frame sections; or 
(6)  Complete side (fenders, door, and quarter panel. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled except trackless trolleys (which are classified as streetcars), motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, or go-carts. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one of a few households. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effect on individuals. 
Public officer means the city manager or his designee. 
Salvage dealer means any person, firm, or corporation who purchases a salvage vehicle or parts of a salvage vehicle for purposes of resale as parts only or as salvage. 
Salvage vehicle means any vehicle which either: 
(1)  Has been damaged, crushed, or otherwise reduced to such a state that its restoration would require the replacement of two or more major component parts; 
(2)  Has been acquired from an insurance company as a result of the vehicle's being damaged to the extent that its restoration to an operable condition would require the replacement of two or more major component parts or for which the insurance company has paid a total loss claim, excluding recovered total theft vehicles which do not require the replacement of two or more major component parts for restoration; or 
(3)  Is an imported vehicle which has been damaged in shipment and disclaimed by the manufacturer as a result of the damage, has never been the subject of a retail sale to a consumer, and has never been issued a certificate of title. 
Scrap vehicle means any vehicle which has been wrecked, destroyed, or damaged to the extent that it cannot be economically repaired, rebuilt, or made operable or roadworthy. 
Trash means rubbish such as feathers, paper, cans, bottles, boxes, wood, glass, shrubs, yard clippings, tree trimmings, and all similar matter. 
Unsafe building means any building or structure that has any of the following conditions, such that the life, heath, property, or safeties of the general public or its occupant are endangered: 
(1)  Whenever any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices, fire resistance ratings, are in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition such that means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any material, member of portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load exceeds the working stresses allowed by the standard building code for new buildings. 
(4)  Whenever a building, structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the buildings or structures is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the standard building code for new buildings. 
(5)  Whenever any exterior appendages or portion of a building or structure is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the standard building code for new buildings. 
(6)  Whenever for any reason a building, structure, or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)  Whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration, or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)  Whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law. 
(9)  Whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof is in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)  Whenever any building, structure, or portion thereof is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or, which in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Weed means a plant considered undesirable, unattractive or troublesome, especially one growing where it is not wanted. 
Sec. 16-2. - Duty of owner to properly maintain. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such provisions of this Code or other applicable laws which regulate and prohibit activities on property. 
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL NUISANCES 

Sec. 16-23. - Declaration of nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance, for any person: 
(1)  To deposit, collect, store, maintain, scatter upon, or permit to be deposited, collected, stored or to remain upon private property any garbage, junk, trash, refuse, abandoned property, or abandoned vehicle, all as defined herein, which is unsightly, unhealthy or hazardous. 
(2)  To permit a condition or use of a premises or of a building exterior which is detrimental to the property or health of others or which causes or tends to cause more than slight diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which said premises is located will be considered unsightly, unhealthy, and/or hazardous. This includes, but is not limited to, the depositing on, scattering over, or keeping upon the premises any of the following: 
a.  Unsheltered storage of lumber, pipe, junk, windows, wire, tires, refuse, garbage, trash, unstacked brick or block, or major component parts of a vehicle; 
b.  Storage of abandoned, discarded or unused appliances, machinery, equipment, furniture, motor vehicles, cans, or containers; 
c.  Any compost pile which is of such nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gases, or attract rodents, or other obnoxious animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance; 
d.  Unsanitary items, deleterious septic or disease producing materials, gases, or fluids, unless such material is contained in containers or vessels which prevent leakage and escape, and which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents, and animals, and such material is kept in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations concerning it; 
e.  Toxic or poisonous materials, gases, or fluids, unless such material is contained in containers or vessels which prevent leakage and escape, and which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals, and such material is kept in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations concerning it; 
f.  Piles of dirt, gravel, sand, brick, concrete block, roofing, metal, or other similar items, substances, or by-products. 
Sec. 16-24. - Recycling not a defense. 
The fact that any garbage, junk, or trash, or abandoned property is being held for recycling or for further processing of the component parts shall not be a defense to any criminal prosecution or action of abatement under this article. It shall not be unlawful for any person or business to possess and store paper, glass, and aluminum cans and containers, if such paper, glass, and aluminum products are to be held for recycling or reprocessing shall be located and carried on solely within a building, except for purposes of loading or unloading said paper, glass, or aluminum cans. 
Sec. 16-25. - Unsheltered storage of non-operating vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a nuisance, for any person to deposit, collect, store, maintain or permit to be deposited, collected, stored, to remain upon said private property any unsheltered vehicle, salvage vehicle, scrap vehicle, other motor vehicles not in good and safe operating condition, unless the non-operating vehicle is sheltered or enclosed behind opaque fencing sufficient to fully restrict access to and the view of the non-operable vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall deal in junk or metals or be a "dismantler;" a "rebuilder" or "salvage dealer," as those terms are defined in this Code, except that a place of business may be maintained for the purposes of a business office only, provided that all activities associated with the physical dismantling, rebuilding, or salvaging, shall be carried on outside the city limits, or at a junkyard permitted and licensed as provided by this Code. 
Sec. 16-26. - Hazardous growth prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance, for any person to allow or permit weeds, grass, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation to grow and be upon such persons or business premises uncut or untrimmed so as to render the premises unsightly, unhealthful, or hazardous from the growth or accumulation of such vegetation. Any growth of weeds, grass, shrubs, trees, or such vegetation which presents a present or potential threat of fire, vermin, rodents, obnoxious insects, pestilence, or disease shall be considered unsightly, unhealthful, and hazardous. 
Sec. 16-27. - Placement of trimmings. 
It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance, for any person to place tree limbs, grass clippings, cuttings, shrubbery and other similar trash in the gutter, storm sewers, or drainage ditches of the city. To place or permit to be placed said trimmings in the gutter, storm sewer, or drainage ditches of the city is declared to be a nuisance and will be subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
Sec. 16-28. - Abatement of nuisances in general. 
Any nuisance existing within the city limits may be abated as provided below: 
(1)  Notice of maintaining a public nuisance. If a violation of this article is found the city manager or his designee shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the nuisance. The time period required to gain compliance shall depend on the nature of the violation constituting a nuisance; the length of time reasonably necessary to cure the condition; and the extent to which the condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  Initiation of proceedings. Should the condition continue beyond the time specified for correction proceedings to abate a public nuisance shall be initiated by the city attorney by filing of a complaint with the municipal court, as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-2 and 41-2-5, which such complaints shall state the nature and location of the alleged violation, including reference to the applicable code section prohibiting the condition or declaring it a nuisance; and the name and address of the complainant or complainants. 
(3)  Notice. Upon the filing of a complaint as hereinabove provided, the city attorney shall serve notice directed to the owner, and where applicable the occupants, of the premises as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
(4)  Hearing. The municipal court shall order such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the municipal court, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed. Such notice shall be served in a manner provided for by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
(5)  Order of abatement. If after hearing all the evidence the municipal court should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the municipal court shall issue an order directed to the city manager commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party maintaining the nuisance. Any costs incurred by the city in the abatement shall constitute a lien against the subject property, and other property of the owner and shall be subject to the collection procedures similar to those set out in general law. 
(6)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the mayor, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
Sec. 16-29. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in the foregoing section shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Secs. 16-30—16-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE STRUCTURES AND DWELLINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to declare and abate unfit structures as defined, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 16-47. - Nuisance property. 
The public officer may determine that a lot is a nuisance if it is maintained in violation of this article. Additionally, the public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of such county or municipality. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
Sec. 16-48. - Abatement of nuisance dwellings, buildings and structures. 
(a)  It is hereby found and declared that in the city, there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes, and those standards adopted by the city including, but not limited to, any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  Further, it is found by the mayor and city council, that there exists in this municipality dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. 
(c)  Therefore, pursuant to O.C.G.A § 41-2-7 et seq., the city enacts this article as an exercise of the power conferred by said state law to exercise the police power of the city to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid property, dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided by O.C.G.A §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, as amended from time to time. 
State Law reference— Certain structures and dwellings found to be nuisance, abatement procedures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
Sec. 16-49. - Appointment of public officer. 
The city manager is designated and appointed the public officer as referenced in this article, and shall be authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10; O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers herein to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 16-50. - Procedure for enforcement. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, the city may abate such public nuisances as defined herein according the following procedure: Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the public officer 's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(b)  If, after notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order directing either: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(c)  The court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  When the court orders such relief as provided above, the court shall also order abatement action by the city if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure. In such case, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 

 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public official and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  Finally, when the court orders such relief as stated above, the court shall also order that the amount of the cost incurred by the city for demolition, all court costs, appraisal fees, any administrative costs incurred by the county or city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
Sec. 16-51. - Lien for costs incurred, collection. 
(a)  The lien provided for under this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public official responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public official shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A § 48-4-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the city. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
Sec. 16-52. - Release of lien. 
The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
(a)  All physicians and hospital superintendents in the city are required to report to the city police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. 
(b)  Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports made under this section shall be made within 24 hours after treatment or admission to the hospital of the patient. 
(Code 2004, § 130.02; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-2. - Rider-propelled vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to take, park or ride a bicycle, skateboard, skates or any other wheeled vehicle, except a wheelchair or similar device for transporting the handicapped, which is propelled by the rider thereof upon any sidewalks. 
(Code 2004, § 130.04; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-3. - Soliciting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any wares or solicit any orders at a private residence without a permit. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for anyone to impede the flow of traffic while soliciting. 
(Code 2004, § 130.08; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-017) 
Sec. 18-4. - Curfew established. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18, in the incorporated area of the city, to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any weekday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on the following days; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; or 
(4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit, or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or other places listed in subsection (a) of this section within the incorporated area of the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any weekday and 5:00 a.m. on the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day except under circumstances set out in subsection (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section. 
(Code 2004, § 130.09; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-5. - Possession of marijuana prohibited. 
Possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be a misdemeanor and an ordinance violation, and may be cited on a uniform traffic citation returnable to the municipal court. 
(Code 2004, § 130.10; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-6. - Shoplifting. 
A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(Code 2004, § 130.11; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-7. - False name and date of birth. 
No person shall give to any law enforcement officer or other authorized representative of the city a false name, address, date of birth, Social Security number, false identification, or otherwise fail to identify oneself after lawful request has been made for such information. 
(Code 2004, § 130.12; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-8. - Obstruction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer, any member of the police department, or any other person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with, obstruct or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(b)  No person shall follow any police officer, while in charge of any prisoner, after such person has been commanded to desist such following, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. 
(Code 2004, § 130.13; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-9. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2004, § 130.14; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 18-10—18-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 18-37. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within 300 yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof, or to discharge, at any time, any air gun, BB gun or otherwise project any missile or stone rock at any person for the purpose of remediation of varmints. Any property owner that seeks permission to discharge a firearm for other purposes shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 2004, § 130.01; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-38. - Possessing, consuming alcoholic beverages at unlicensed premises. 
No person, including the patron of a business, shall possess and give the appearance of consuming any type of alcoholic beverage on the premises of a business which is not licensed as a retail consumption dealer. Such prohibition extends to shopping center parking lots, fast food establishments and any other place of business. This does not apply if a temporary alcohol permit has been issued. 
(Code 2004, § 130.26; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-39. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverages in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building unless usage is authorized pursuant to a license issued by the city and in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 130.05; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-40. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition while in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, except where expressly invited by the owner or lawful occupant of the private property. The term "public place" includes any building or land owned by the city, schools, places of public worship, public streets, sidewalks, or any other publicly owned lands. Evidence of an intoxicated person shall include a combination of the following indicators: 
(1)  Odor of intoxicants; 
(2)  Boisterous or obnoxious behavior; 
(3)  Indecent or lewd conduct; 
(4)  Stumbling or staggering; 
(5)  Slurred speech; 
(6)  Vulgar, profane, or unbecoming speech; or 
(7)  The failure of a standard field sobriety test administered by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 2004, § 130.06; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-41. - Noisy, unruly conduct. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of the character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in a manner or with the volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(10)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the evening hours, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances or when there is urgent necessity therefor; and 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d)  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city, provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county, nor the city, nor to public agencies. 
(Code 2004, § 130.27; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-42. - Assistance to law enforcement officers. 
No person shall willfully refuse the request or command of a duly authorized law enforcement officer to summon help or assistance, via telephone or police radio, or by whatever means of communication may be readily available, where such refusal could result in an injury to any person or damage to any property. 
(Code 2004, § 130.28; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-43. - Interference with summoning of police assistance. 
No person shall intentionally interfere with another person's lawful attempt to summon police assistance through the use of a telephone, radio or other communication device. 
(Code 2004, § 130.29; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-44. - Urination, defecation in public. 
No person shall intentionally urinate or defecate while in a public place, other than a public restroom. 
(Code 2004, § 130.30; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-45. - Disrupting assemblies. 
No person shall recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Code 2004, § 130.31; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-46. - Threatening others. 
(a)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such other person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health. 
(b)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such other person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 2004, § 130.32; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-47. - Fighting words. 
No person shall, without provocation, use to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words, which by their very utterance, tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace, such as words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment. Such words are commonly known as fighting words. 
(Code 2004, § 130.33; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-48. - Use of vulgar, profane language. 
No person shall, without provocation, use obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Code 2004, § 130.34; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-49. - Public obscenity. 
No person shall commit any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An act or a simulated act of sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(2)  A lewd exposure or indecent fondling of the sexual organs; 
(3)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; or 
(4)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(Code 2004, § 130.35; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-50. - Entering private recreational facilities. 
No person shall enter or remain upon the private recreational facilities of another, without the consent of the owner thereof or such person authorized to give such consent, for the purpose of utilizing such recreational facilities, which are normally reserved for the residents or employees of a residential neighborhood, apartment complex, business or association. 
(Code 2004, § 130.36; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-51. - Crossing police barricades. 
No person shall, without authority, cross any type of barrier or barrier tape erected by any police officer, firefighter or other public official for the purpose of excluding the public from the scene of any incident or emergency. 
(Code 2004, § 130.37; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-52. - Refusal to disperse. 
No person shall refuse to disperse when requested to do so by a law enforcement officer at the scene of any incident, emergency or other occurrence where the public safety and order are threatened. 
(Code 2004, § 130.38; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-53. - Poolrooms; minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person who operates a billiard parlor or poolroom in the city to allow any person under 16 years of age to enter billiard parlors or poolrooms in the city, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 2004, § 130.39; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 18-54—18-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOITERING 

Sec. 18-80. - In public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter upon any premises to which the public has access, including, but not limited to, places such as shopping center parking lots, when such person does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present on such premises. Any person who does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present on such premises and who shall willfully fail to remove himself from such premises after being requested to do so by a law enforcement officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 2004, § 130.45; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-81. - Halting or impeding flow of traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed or ordered to clear such public way or place by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 2004, § 130.46; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-82. - Drug-related activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this article, the term "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" means a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within the state of a violation involving the use, possession or sale of any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A § 16-13-1 et seq., or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or use, such as needle tracks, burned or calloused thumb and index fingers, underweight, nervous and excited behavior; 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in, or is then engaged in, an unlawful drug-related activity, including, for example, such person acting as a lookout or hailing or stopping cars; 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by a police officer as a member of a gang or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion; 
(6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer; 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
(8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances, including, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades or other cutting tools; 
(9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking; or 
(10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller, or to a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(Code 2004, § 130.47; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-83. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances which warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person who is loitering or prowling takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by such person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(Code 2004, § 130.48; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-84. - Engaging in the solicitation of sex acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or loiter in any public place for the solicitation of another to: 
(1)  Perform or offer, or consent to perform an act of prostitution; 
(2)  Perform or submit to an act of sodomy; or 
(3)  Erotically stimulate the genital organs of another, whether resulting in orgasm or not, by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse, or by instrumental manipulation. 
(Code 2004, § 130.49; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 18-85—18-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI AND RELATED VANDALISM 

Sec. 18-112. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to prevent graffiti and to promote its eradication and to prevent related vandalism, as they adversely affect property, both public and private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces which contain graffiti or are subject to graffiti-related vandalism. It is the further intent of this article to fight against blight, to preserve the value of property, both public and private, and to promote the security of the community, all of which are threatened by the spread of graffiti and graffiti related vandalism. 
(Code 2004, § 130.55; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Aerosol paint container means any canister, can, bottle, container, or other receptacle which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye and/or any other pigmented substance which is and/or can be modified to contain pressure, or be pressurized, in order to impel and/or propel any such substance. 
Etcher means any tool, device, and/or other mechanism including, but not limited to, any tool, device, and/or other mechanism commonly known as glass etcher, metal etcher, cutting instrument or drill bit or any other instrument that can be applied by pressure or any other contact with any surface including, but not limited to, glass, mirrors, windows, steel, aluminum, brass, tin, fiberglass, wood, plastic, concrete or any other surface which can cause any markings commonly known as graffiti or related vandalism. 
Graffiti and related vandalism means any unauthorized inscription, symbol, design and/or configuration of letters and/or numbers written, drawn, scribed, etched, marked, painted, stained, stuck on or adhered to any surface, public or private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings, and/or any other structures or surfaces, regardless of the material of the component. 
Graffiti implements or paraphernalia means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, markers, paint sticks, etchers, gum labels; also including, but not limited to, tips (or nozzles) which can be applied to aerosol paint containers; any records of graffiti or related vandalism including, but not limited to, pictures, photographs, drawings, scrap books and/or other records depicting or illustrating any forms of graffiti or related vandalism. 
Gum label means any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps or labels. 
Marker means any implement commonly known as an indelible or permanent ink marker and/or marking pen and/or any similar implement which contains any pigmented substance including, but not limited to, ink or any other substance which cannot be easily and completely removed with water after said substance has dried and where the width of the marking is 1/16 of one inch or greater. 
Paint balloon means any canister, can, container, bottle or other receptacle including, but not limited to, anything commonly known as a balloon or other receptacle made of any material such as, but not limited to, latex, plastic, rubber, paper, glass or other material which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye or any other pigmented substance intended for the purpose of defacing any property, public or private, upon impact or contact of any surface including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces regardless of the material of the component. 
Paint stick means any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy and/or any other similar substance which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to and/or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark measuring at least 1/16 of one inch at any point, otherwise described as graffiti or related vandalism. 
Stamp and stamping device means any tool, device or implement which can cause upon impact or contact any mark by means of ink, paint, stain or any other substance or material including, but not limited to, any device commonly known as a rubber stamp or similar device, whether manufactured, handmade or devised, for the purpose of defacing property, public or private. 
Supplier means any person or entity, such as, but not limited to, any business, company, co-op, corporation, enterprise, manufacturer, organization, partnership, proprietor, retail or wholesale store or outlet which sells, trades, donates, gives or requisitions to the public in any capacity whatsoever any graffiti implements. 
(Code 2004, § 130.56; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-114. - Interpretation. 
This article shall be interpreted so as to work with and in conjunction with, when and where applicable, any and all state and/or local ordinances relating to the control of graffiti and/or related vandalism. 
(Code 2004, § 130.57; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-115. - Prohibition of graffiti and related vandalism. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to commit any act resulting in or attempting to result in the application of graffiti or the engaging in or attempting to engage in an act of related vandalism including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Any act such as drawing, scribing, etching, marking, painting, staining, sticking on or adhering to any surface, public or private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces; 
(2)  Any act of participation in applying graffiti such as, but not limited to, conspiring to commit or assist in the applying of graffiti or engaging in or assisting in an act of related vandalism, including, but not limited to, acting as a look-out, regardless of the fact the act was not actually witnessed; 
(3)  Any person who knowingly allows any acts of graffiti or related vandalism to occur on or to any property over which he has control as owner, tenant or possessor and who thereafter fails to promptly report such acts to the proper authorities is guilty of being a principal to the offense; or 
(4)  Exceptions. Any mural or work of art approved by the city or other governmental agency through a design review or planning process and requiring proper permits prior to commencement of any work shall not constitute graffiti. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, business, company, or other entity which owns or otherwise controls any building, sign, pole, vehicle, trailer, trash receptacle, wall, parking lot, walkway or any other structure or real property to knowingly allow or permit any graffiti or related vandalism to be placed on, or to take place on, any such structure or property where the graffiti and/or results of the vandalism are visible from any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Graffiti and/or graffiti-related vandalism which appear on property and/or structures where such graffiti or related vandalism is visible from a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement. 
(Code 2004, § 130.58; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-116. - Possession of graffiti implements or paraphernalia. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia with the intent of applying graffiti markings or engaging in related vandalism. Exceptions to this section are as follows: 
(1)  Any minor enrolled in any education class which requires otherwise legal possession of any graffiti implement or paraphernalia, provided the minor is carrying written verification of any such requirements, including color, size, and quantity, and written consent from his parent or lawfully designated custodian, dated and signed; or 
(2)  Any minor whose employment requires possession of any graffiti implement or paraphernalia, provided the minor is carrying written verification of any such job requirements, including color, size, quantity, job information and purpose, and written consent from the employer, dated and signed. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia while in, on, at or about any public property, including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, schools, school district facilities, libraries, court houses, utility stations, storm drains or any other publicly owned, operated and/or maintained facility. 
(Code 2004, § 130.59; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 18-117—18-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS 

Sec. 18-146. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(Code 2004, § 130.65; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-147. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Code 2004, § 130.66; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-148. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as provided in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, daycare center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, daycare center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(c)  Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, daycare center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 and had an ownership or leasehold interest in the property, all prior to May 1, 2006; 
(2)  The person was a minor when he committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult; 
(3)  The person is a minor; or 
(4)  The school, designated public school bus stop or daycare center within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. 
(Code 2004, § 130.67; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-149. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this Code, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, daycare center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  Each calendar month a property owner violates this provision shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 130.68; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-150. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties referenced in this article and imposed by chapter 1 or other state or federal law, when convicted by the municipal court for a violation of this article, the court, as part of any sentence imposed, may also order that restitution be paid to the victim by the admitted or convicted perpetrator and in the case of a perpetrator who is a minor by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. 
(b)  As a part of any sentence imposed, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the victim by the admitted or convicted perpetrator and in the case of a perpetrator who is a minor by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the perpetrator and/or parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian may be required to enroll in and attend a diversionary program, possibly requiring liability waivers and/or payment towards all or a portion of the cost of the program, as such costs shall have been established by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2004, § 130.99; Ord. No. 1705, 5-22-2017) 
Chapter 20 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local government financial management standards and procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-1; Code 2004, § 36.01) 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGET 

Sec. 20-21. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and city council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-2; Code 2004, § 35.02) 
Sec. 20-22. - City fund balance reserve policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The city desires to maintain a prudent level of financial resources to guard its stakeholders against service disruption in the event of unexpected temporary revenue shortfalls or unpredicted one-time expenditures. In addition, this policy is intended to document the appropriate reserve level to protect the city's credit worthiness and provide adequate cash flow based upon the traditional operating cycle. Reserves are accumulated and maintained to provide stability and flexibility to respond to unexpected adversity and/or opportunities and to minimize the costs associated with short-term cash borrowing. Moody's analysis recommends the establishment of a formal reserve policy because they minimize political considerations of adequate reserve levels and keep the municipalities more focused on providing structural balance in their operations. 
(b)  Authority. The city council is responsible for the approval of financial policies which establish and direct the operations of the city. The city manager is responsible for carrying out the policy directives of the city council and managing the day-to-day operations of all departments. This policy shall be administered on behalf of the city manager by the city clerk or any future employees assigned to work in the city's finance department. 
(c)  Monitoring performance. 
(1)  The city will measure its compliance with this policy on an annual basis during the city's budgeting process. During the course of the fiscal year, the city manager shall closely monitor the city's revenues and expenditures to ensure reserves are not being used unless authorized by council. If the target level of reserves is not met at fiscal year-end or is not likely to be met at any point within a three-year time horizon, then during the annual budget process a plan to replenish the reserve levels will be developed by the city manager and city council. 
(2)  Periodic review of the targets. At a minimum, during the annual financial planning/budget process, staff shall review the current and three-year projected reserves to ensure that they are appropriate given the economic and financial risk factors the city is subject to. 
(d)  Funding the reserves. Funding of reserve targets will generally come from excess revenues over expenditures or one-time revenues. 
(e)  Excess of reserves. In the event reserves exceed the maximum balance requirements, at the end of each fiscal year, any excess reserves may be used in the following ways: 
(1)  To pay down principle of any debt, bond or other sources of indebtedness the city has acquired; 
(2)  Can be transferred to another fund of the city for increasing fund balance or budget overruns from the previous fiscal year; or 
(3)  Can be kept in the reserve fund upon vote of the council either to increase the maximum or to allow short-term increases based upon an already approved action plan for the funds. 
(f)  Designated reserves. The following fund reserves are utilized by the city: 
(1)  General fund reserve; and 
(2)  Utility fund capital reserve. 
(g)  General fund reserve. 
(1)  Operating expenses. The city will maintain a fund balance in the general fund equivalent to, at a minimum, 50 percent of regular ongoing operating expenditures and, at a maximum, 12 months (100 percent) of regular ongoing operating expenditures. For the purposes of this policy, expenses shall be measured by three-year averages by department upon 90 percent fund balance. 
(2)  Debt service. In addition to the aforementioned reserve for operating expenses, the city will maintain a minimum level of fund balance in the general fund equal to debt service payments due within the next 12 months. 
(h)  Water utility fund capital reserve. 
(1)  Operating expenses. The city will maintain a fund balance in the utility fund equivalent to, at a minimum, 50 percent of regular ongoing operating expenditures and, at a maximum, 12 months (100 percent) of regular ongoing operating expenditures. For the purposes of this policy, expenses shall be measured by three-year averages by department upon 90 percent fund balance. 
(2)  Capital funding. In addition to the aforementioned reserve for operating expenses, the city will maintain a fund balance in the utility fund capital reserve to, at a minimum, provide for 40 percent of the estimated value of all capital assets of the water utility fund, for the purpose of future replacement. 
(3)  Debt service. The city will maintain a minimum level of fund balance in the water utility fund equal to debt service payments due within the next 12 months. 
(i)  Emergency/temporary uses of reserves. In the event that the city designates an event as an emergency or temporary occurrence, reserve funds may be used if approved by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  Emergency uses are those that occur without notice and will result in reserve funds being transferred to other accounts for longer than one-year (12-month) increments. Upon the affirmative recommendation of the city manager and mayor, the council may approve the use if three of the four councilmembers vote in favor of the use. 
(2)  Temporary uses are those that would result in less than a one-year (12-month) increment from the time the funds are transferred until they are fully restored to the reserve account. Tax anticipation notes are an example of this type of temporary use. Upon the recommendation of the city manager, the council may approve the use by simple majority. 
(j)  Remediation. At no time in which reserve funds are owed to any account shall the city either decrease or roll back annual ad valorem taxes or decrease any monthly utility rate. The targets below shall be reevaluated and adjusted by the city manager annually, in a manner similar to the illustration shown below. 

 
(Code 2004, § 36.24; Ord. No. 1717, 12-21-2017) 
Secs. 20-23—20-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY (AD VALOREM) TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-48. - Tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax shall be levied upon all real and personal property within the city. The mileage rate therefor shall be established each year by ordinance of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-11; Code 2004, § 35.20) 
Sec. 20-49. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills shall be due on the date established annually by the mayor and city council, or his designee, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 10, but in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by ordinance of the mayor and city council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-12; Code 2004, § 35.21) 
State Law reference— Ordinance for installment payments, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23. 
Sec. 20-50. - Executions for taxes. 
For all taxes of the city unpaid on the delinquency date established annually by the mayor and city council, or his designee the tax commissioner or other designee of the mayor and city council shall issue executions and take other steps to collect delinquent taxes, interest and penalties as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-3-3 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-13; Code 2004, § 35.22; Ord. No. 234, 12-9-1974) 
State Law reference— Tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-3; notice of levy, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9 et seq.; civil procedure for executions, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-13; interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
Sec. 20-51. - Tax sales. 
(a)  The time, place and manner of sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city shall be the same as that provided by law for the sheriff's sale for state and county taxes; provided, that the sale may be conducted and had before the door of the city hall, when so advertised, and the sale shall be conducted by the chief of police of the city, or, in his absence, by his deputy. 
(b)  All sales of property for taxes due the city shall be advertised the same number of times, in the same paper and in the same manner as sheriff's sales in the county for state and county taxes are advertised. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he is hereby authorized, to attend all sales of property for taxes due the city. In the event no one person shall bid for the property put up to be sold as much as the tax for which it is proposed to sell the same, the officer's costs if any due thereon, after the property shall have been cried a reasonable time, it shall be the duty of the city manager to bid off the property for the city. The chief of police shall make a deed to the city to the property sold and deliver the same to the city manager, provided that no property so purchased by the city shall ever be sold by the city except at a public sale thereof to the highest bidder. The city may, relative to all property so purchased, the title to which is in the city at the time and upon unanimous vote of the mayor and city council, quit-claim the same to the owner thereof upon application by the owner and the payment to the city of all taxes, interest and costs due and for which the premises were sold. 
(d)  All property sold by the city shall be auctioned off to the highest bidder for cash and the chief of police shall execute to the purchaser a deed thereto in the usual form of tax deeds. The surplus money arising from the sale shall be paid into the city treasury, subject to the order of the owner for the surplus. The chief of police shall return a list of all properties sold, describing the property, on whose account sold and the respective amounts each piece of property sold for and the surplus of the sale in each case, to the mayor and city council at their next regular meeting after the sale of the property, and the mayor and city council shall cause the same to be entered upon its minutes. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a book in which he shall post each list and to properly preserve and keep the book. 
(e)  All sales for city taxes shall be subject to redemption by the owner as is provided by law and section 4.09 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1985, § 2-5-14; Code 2004, § 35.23; Ord. No. 234, 12-9-1974) 
State Law reference— Tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Secs. 20-52—20-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Community redevelopment tax incentive, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ VIII. 

Sec. 20-76. - Community redevelopment tax incentive. 
(a)  Findings. The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of government by increasing the need for government services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases the need for such government services. In recognition of such service needs and in order to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is established as authorized by Ga. Const. art IX, § II, ¶ VIII. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Blighted, as applied to a piece of property, means that property is being maintained in a blighted condition. 
Millage rate means only the general millage rate for the city maintenance and operations. 
Public officer means the city manager or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer, or any other employee or officer designated by the city manager for purposes of this section. 
(c)  Blighted condition designation. In order for the property in question to be subject to official identification as blighted and subject to increased taxation, the property must be determined to be: 
(1)  Unfit for human habitation or unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(3)  Constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; and 
(4)  Not a dwelling house which is being used as the primary residence of one or more persons. 
(d)  Procedure for identification of property as blighted. The procedure for official identification of real property as blighted includes: 
(1)  A request from a public officer or at least five residents of the city charging that any building, structure or property meets criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; 
(2)  An investigation or inspection by a public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; 
(3)  A public officer's issuance of a complaint in rem against the property. The complaint shall state which condition under subsection (c) of this section exist on the property and what steps should be taken to remediate the property; 
(4)  A public officer causing a summons and a copy of the complaint to be mailed on the owner of the property and holder of any security deed if and as identified in the city ad valorem tax digest for such property; 
(5)  A hearing shall be held in the municipal court upon any complaint issued as provided herein; 
(6)  No property shall be designated as blighted unless the municipal court enters an order that finds the property in question meets the criteria described in subsections (c)(1), (2), or (3) of this section but does not conform to subsection (c)(4) of this section. This order constitutes official identification of real property as maintained in a blighted condition; and 
(7)  If the court finds that the property is blighted, it shall, in the same order, list what must be done to remove the blighted condition designation, and give the owner a deadline in which to finish the work. 
(e)  Imposition of increased tax rate. Property which has been officially designated as blighted shall be subject to an increased rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to five times (500 percent) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. The increased rate continues to be applied to all subsequent tax bills until the property's designation as maintained in a blighted condition is removed as provided in this section. This increased rate of taxation and the official identification of the property as blighted remain with the property if transferred to another owner. 
(f)  Revenues segregated. Revenues collected from increases in rates of ad valorem taxation shall be segregated and applied to community redevelopment purposes. 
(g)  Remediation. The property in question may be rehabilitated at any time through remedial actions or redevelopment that conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as maintained in a blighted condition. Owner may request removal of the property's designation as blighted from the city manager or from the municipal court upon proper proof, including an inspection by a public officer, that the property has been remediated and now conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as blighted. The city manager shall be notified in writing ten days before any hearing in the municipal court. 
(h)  Remediated property tax rate. Property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed as provided in this section will become eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to one-half (50 percent) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. This decreased rate is applied to one-year's tax bill, and all subsequent years shall revert back to the standard millage rate, provided that the property does not return to a blighted condition. 
(Code 2004, § 36.34; Ord. No. 1720, 12-21-2017) 
Secs. 20-77—20-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 20-96—20-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LODGING 

Sec. 20-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the end of the quarterly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants in a motel for the temporary purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Manager means the city manager or his designee. 
Motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any motel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, hotel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, bed and breakfast inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. The term "motel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained either involuntary or under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant or guest means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a motel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this division. 
(Code 2004, § 36.70; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-120. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, and there shall be paid to the city manager or his designee a tax of six percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a motel in the city. 
(Code 2004, § 36.71; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-121. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a motel located within the city to collect from the occupants the tax levied and imposed upon the occupancy of guest rooms by the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2004, § 36.72; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-122. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no tax shall be levied as provided by this division upon the fees or charges of any room, lodgings, or accommodations: 
(1)  Furnished for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business; or 
(2)  Furnished to any persons who certify that they are staying at such location as the result of the destruction of or significant damage to their home or residence by fire, storm, or other casualty. 
(Code 2004, § 36.73; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-123. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in the city shall immediately register with the city manager or his designee on a form provided by said city manager or his designee. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 15 days after the date the ordinance from which this division is derived becomes effective, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city manager or his designee may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; and by an executive officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator, if he maintains or operates more than one such place of business in the city. 
(c)  In order to facilitate registration, the city manager or his designee may prescribe administrative provisions other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to affect the purposes of this division, and, once adopted, shall be specifically incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. 
(Code 2004, § 36.74; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-124. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the consideration of an operator as hereinbefore provided, the city manager or his designee shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax from the occupants, stating the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the city manager or his designee upon the cessation of business by the registered operator at the location named, or upon sale or transfer of such business at said location. 
(Code 2004, § 36.75; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-125. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes levied and imposed by this division shall be due and payable to the city on a monthly basis, on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding each respective quarterly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Code 2004, § 36.76; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-126. - Returns and time of filing; remittance of tax. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of the following month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city manager or his designee in such form as the city manager or his designee may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(b)  All returns shall show the gross rent, exempt rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the quarterly period for which filed, and such other information as may be required by the city manager or his designee, and shall be accompanied when filed by remittance of the net amount of tax due. 
(Code 2004, § 36.77; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-127. - Collection fee allowed operator. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due; if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 2004, § 36.78; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-128. - Deficiency determination. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis for recomputation. If the city manager or his designee is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information which is or may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one quarterly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the quarterly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination of deficiency, the city manager or his designee may offset overpayments for a period, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service of. The city manager or his designee or any other agent of the city shall give to the operator written notice of any determination of deficiency. The notice may be served personally or by mail, or both. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city manager or his designee. 
(e)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of a failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within one year after the 20th day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within one year after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Code 2004, § 36.79; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-129. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipt. If any operator fails to make a return, the city manager or his designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period during which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information, which is or may come into the possession of the city manager or his designee. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city manager or his designee shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one quarterly period. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination under this section, the city manager or his designee may offset overpayments for a period, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. 
(c)  Interest on amount found. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month from and after the 20th day of the month following the quarterly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties, and interest. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service of. Promptly after making his determination, service of this notice shall be either by personal service or by mail, at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 2004, § 36.80; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-130. - Collection of tax and enforcement. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. When it is determined by a return filed, or by the city manager or his designee having made a determination under the provisions of sections 20-18 or 20-129, that tax is due and payable to the city under the provisions of this division, the city manager or his designee may at any time within three years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the court of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount of tax payable to the city together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi. fa. under the provisions of section 20-131. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this division sells or transfers his business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount from the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the city, unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the city manager or his designee showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown to be due and payable on said returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business governed by this division fails to withhold the required amount of any delinquent taxes due hereunder from the purchase price, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. In addition, the city may refuse to issue a certificate of authority to collect the tax due under this division to any purchaser failing to withhold any past due taxes from the purchase price until such taxes have been paid and any deficiency or other tax liability of the prior operator hereunder have been satisfied. 
(Code 2004, § 36.81; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-131. - Issuance of fi. fa. 
Taxes payable on rental fees for guest rooms hereunder shall constitute a lien against the real property on which the motel is located. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to issue a fi. fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this division, whether as a result of a deficiency determination, failure to file returns, or any other reason. 
(Code 2004, § 36.82; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-132. - Administration of division. 
(a)  Authority of the city manager. The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this division. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators, and the like. Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or his designee or any person authorized in writing by the city, may enter on the motel premises and examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this division, the city manager or his designee may require the filing of the reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms, which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager or his designee when required by the city manager or his designee and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(f)  Limitation on disclosure of business of operators, and the like. The city manager or his designee or any person having an administrative duty under this division shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this division, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect tax hereby levied and assessed, or as required by the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., or any other laws of this state or United States. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and grantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. If the city or its agents are required to disclose any such information described in this section pursuant to court order or the Open Records Act or any similar such legal compulsion, the city shall not be liable to any operator or other person for damages claimed to have arisen due to such disclosure. 
(Code 2004, § 36.83; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-133. - Agents for receiving notices. 
When registering pursuant to section 20-123, each operator shall appoint, in writing, an agent to receive any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this division, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the city or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of a successor agent, and the operator may serve as that agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should any agent cease to be a resident of the city or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in the city, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the city manager or his designee. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this division. Delivery of any such notice to such agent, in person or by mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this division and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplemental and cumulative of the other methods of giving notice set forth in this division. 
(Code 2004, § 36.84; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 20-134. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 (a)(4.2). 
(Code 2004, § 36.85; Ord. No. 403, 12-17-2007) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Assessments for improvements, O.C.G.A. § title 36, ch. 39; authority of municipalities to own, operate and maintain streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; constitutional powers regarding streets, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street administration, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-91 et seq.; street obstructions, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in the city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of the city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of the city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 8-1-5; Code 2004, § 70.05) 
Sec. 22-2. - Permit to dig in streets. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, drainage ditch or other public place for any purposes, including for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city manager. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city manager's office at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(b)  Application for permit. All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(c)  City indemnified. Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section agrees as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1985, §§ 4-1-1—4-1-3; Code 2004, § 92.01) 
Sec. 22-3. - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-4; Code 2004, § 92.02) 
Sec. 22-4. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-5; Code 2004, § 92.03) 
Sec. 22-5. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-6; Code 2004, § 92.04) 
Sec. 22-6. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool, or to deposit any substance of any kind whatsoever, upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which in any way may alter, damage, injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1985, § 4-1-7; Code 2004, § 92.05) 
Secs. 22-7—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERING AND STREET NAMES 

Sec. 22-31. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties by law enforcement, fire, rescue and emergency medical service personnel in the city. 
(b)  The city or its designee shall, by rule, prescribe a numbering system for lots and structures and approve the assignment of street numbers to lots and structures in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2004, § 92.15; Ord. No. 359, 10-2003) 
Sec. 22-32. - Designation. 
(a)  All buildings and building sites within the city shall be numbered in a uniform plan, and all buildings shall have displayed on the front or street side thereof the numbers as may be designated under the plan and the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Buildings and building sites on running south of Highway 78 shall be numbered northerly to southerly and buildings and building sites north of Highway 78 shall be numbered southerly to northerly. Buildings and building sites running on the west side of Highway 221 shall be numbered easterly to westerly and on the east side of Highway 221 shall be numbered westerly to easterly. One number shall be allowed for each 100 feet of frontage, whether improved or vacant, provided that each existing house and tenement or building entrance with a frontage of less than 100 feet shall receive a number. 
(Code 2004, § 92.16; Ord. No. 359, 10-2003) 
Sec. 22-33. - Display of numbers. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of single-family residence shall fail to post, in no less than four-inch (preferably reflective) Arabic numbers, the numerical address on that residence. The numbers shall be placed on the residence or building within five feet of the front door, on the street facing side of the home, in a contrasting color to the house. Where the residence is set back from the roadway so the numbers would not be visible from the road, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox or other method so as to identify the residence. 
(b)  No owner of a multiple-family residence shall fail to post in no less than four-inch Arabic numbers the numerical address on the multiple-family dwelling. The numbers shall be placed on the building on a wall facing the street and where the dwelling is set back from the roadway so the numbers are not visible from the road, the numbers shall be displayed on a mailbox or other methods so as to identify the residence. 
(c)  No owner or occupant of a commercial establishment shall fail to post above the main door no less than four-inch Arabic numbers the address of the commercial establishment. 
(d)  No plat or replat of a subdivision shall be recorded unless each lot bears a street number in accordance with the requirement of the street number plan. 
(Code 2004, § 92.17; Ord. No. 359, 10-2003) 
Sec. 22-34. - Removing or altering numbers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, change or deface any house number properly assigned or placed on or near a building or to place or retain on any building any number other than the one duly assigned by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 92.18; Ord. No. 359, 10-2003) 
Sec. 22-35. - Street names. 
Streets shall be named and renamed by the mayor and city council so that their names are easy to understand and to avoid duplication or conflict with other names of streets within the 30814 zip code area. 
(Code 2004, § 92.19; Ord. No. 359, 10-2003) 
Secs. 22-36—22-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 

Sec. 22-59. - Intent and purpose. 
The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and constitution of the state, including, but not limited to, Ga. Const. art. 9, § 1, paragraphs 2 and 3, and O.C.G.A., §§ 36-1-20 and 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city right-of-way. 
(Code 2004, § 92.30); Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016 
Sec. 22-60. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Code 2004, § 92.31; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construct" shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construction" shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the city manager or his designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facilities representative means the specifically identified agent/employee of a utility who is authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent for facilities related information. The utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
Facility means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that is consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, or may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities mean facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Code 2004, § 92.32); Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016 
Sec. 22-62. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the registrant). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to ensure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Code 2004, § 92.33; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-63. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative; 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city manager and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The city shall serve a utility with a written notice 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Code 2004, § 92.34; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-64. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city right-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  Excavating. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Code 2004, § 92.35; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-65. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Code 2004, § 92.36; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-66. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Code 2004, § 92.37; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-67. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as provided in the Code. 
(Code 2004, § 92.38; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Sec. 22-68. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, this state and the city Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance. 
(c)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. 
(Code 2004, § 92.39; Ord. No. 490, 8-22-2016) 
Secs. 22-69—22-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 22-95. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct the parade or procession within the city. 
(b)  Application for permit. An application for a permit to conduct or sponsor a parade or procession shall be filed with the chief of police in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade or procession; 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or procession; 
(3)  The date and hours of the parade or procession; 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade or procession and its beginning and termination points; 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade or procession; and 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade or procession. 
(c)  Investigation. The chief of police shall investigate all applications for parade permits and may issue permits where the information specified in this section has been furnished, provided the proposed parade or procession is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city, of which circumstances the chief of police shall exercise his discretion. 
(Code 1985, §§ 7-4-1—7-4-3; Code 2004, § 95.01) 
Secs. 22-96—22-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY TREES 

Sec. 22-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
(Code 2004, § 96.01; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-120. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree board. 
(1)  Small trees. Apricot, Bradford pear, crabapple, flowering peach, golden rain tree, hawthorn, Japanese lilac tree, purpleleaf plum, redbud, serviceberry, soapberry. 
(2)  Medium trees. Basswood, English oak, green ash, hackberry, honey locust (thornless), Japanese pagoda tree, linden, Osage orange (male, thornless), pecan, persimmon, red mulberry (fruitless, male), red oak, river birch, sassafras, white poplar. 
(3)  Large trees. Bur oak, cottonwood (cottonless, male), Kentucky coffee tree, London sycamore, silver maple, sugar maple, sycamore. 
(Code 2004, § 96.02; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-121. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 22-120, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Code 2004, § 96.03; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-122. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 22-120, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. 
(Code 2004, § 96.04; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-123. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fireplug. 
(Code 2004, § 96.05; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-124. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 22-120 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Code 2004, § 96.06; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-125. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection of said trees is in accordance with sections 22-120 through 22-124 
(Code 2004, § 96.07; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-126. - Tree topping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. The term "topping" means the severe cutting-back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(b)  Exemptions. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Code 2004, § 96.08; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-127. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
(a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Code 2004, § 96.09; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-128. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. 
(b)  The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. 
(c)  In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Code 2004, § 96.10; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-129. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 2004, § 96.11; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-130. - Interference with city tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Code 2004, § 96.12; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-131. - Arborist's license and bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be as determined by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employees doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city from any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Code 2004, § 96.13; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-132. - Review by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board, within ten days from the date of said ruling, to the city council, which may hear the matter and make the final decision. 
(Code 2004, § 96.14; Ord. No. 392, 3-19-2007) 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376 and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, except for §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1985, § 8-1-1; Code 2004, § 70.01; Ord. No. 240, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 24-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the city manager may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 8-1-2; Code 2004, § 70.02) 
Sec. 24-3. - City manager to designate traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones. 
(a)  The city manager, after conducting certain inquiries and traffic investigations as may be necessary, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals; 
(8)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(9)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(10)  Traffic lanes; and 
(11)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)  A current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(c)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(d)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code, as defined in chapter 1. 
(Code 1985, § 8-1-4; Code 2004, § 70.04) 
Sec. 24-4. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1985, § 8-2-1; Code 2004, § 71.01) 
Sec. 24-5. - Speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Unless otherwise limited by subsection (a) of this section, no person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor in excess of the posted speed limits as established pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 8-2-2; Code 2004, § 71.02) 
Sec. 24-6. - Traffic signs, signals and markings. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and city council, or pursuant to authority delegated herein. 
(Code 1985, § 8-2-3; Code 2004, § 71.03) 
Sec. 24-7. - Tracked vehicles prohibited on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Code 1985, § 8-2-4; Code 2004, § 71.04) 
Sec. 24-8. - Prohibiting activation or use of an engine brake; emergency situations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency situation means a circumstance in which there is imminent danger of a collision with property, persons, and/or animals and/or what is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
Engine-braking means the use or operation of any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or deceleration of any motor vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle. 
Excessively loud means audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  Prohibition. It is unlawful for a driver of any motor vehicle to activate or use an internal combustion-powered vehicle on any public ways, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, easements, or rights-of-way established for vehicle operation within the city, while said vehicle operator is utilizing an engine brake without an exhaust muffler sufficient to prevent the creation of loud noises, by the vehicle, due to improperly maintained, defective, or modified muffler systems, except when the use of the engine brake is necessary in an emergency situation. This section is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine brakes. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall be for emergency situations described herein: 
(1)  Noise caused by the application of engine brakes, also know, as compression-braking which is effectively muffled or if the application is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the community is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes are also exempt. 
(d)  Posting of signs. The city manager shall post at reasonable locations in the city, signs, including the prohibition of engine-braking in a non-emergency situation. 
(Code 2004, § 71.05; Ord. No. 370, 5-16-2005) 
Sec. 24-9. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-1; Code 2004, § 72.01) 
Sec. 24-10. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-2; Code 2004, § 72.02) 
Sec. 24-11. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain hours and days. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-4; Code 2004, § 72.04) 
Sec. 24-12. - Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated by the city manager as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs. 
(Code 1985, § 8-3-5; Code 2004, § 72.05) 
Secs. 24-13—24-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-45. - Motorized carts. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The city council finds that all public streets located within its territorial boundaries and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by regular vehicular traffic and also the driving of motorized carts, except as stated elsewhere in this section. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motorized carts mean those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly called golf carts. These are the only carts authorized for use under this section. 
(b)  Registration; certification. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated in the streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the city within ten business days of the date of purchase. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon registration; and the record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner shall be maintained by the department of public safety. The decals must be affixed to the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The registration fee for motorized carts owned by city residents shall be as established by the mayor and city council and provided in the city fee schedule, plus the cost of the decals, and the registration shall be effective until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. Upon occurrence of a sale or the transfer of ownership by other means to another person who shall operate the cart over the streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within 30 calendar days of the change of ownership at a cost as established by the mayor and council and provided in the city fee schedule. In the event the registration for the cart is not transferred, the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart. 
(2)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and that person must sign the registration form. 
(c)  Operating regulations. 
(1)  Those persons who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized cart on the streets of the city and those areas accessible by the public of the city. 
(2)  Every licensee shall have his driver's license in his immediate possession at all times when operating a motorized cart. 
(3)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. 
(4)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the sidewalks or pedestrian rights-of-way within the city limits. 
(5)  Motorized carts may cross streets and highways, under the jurisdiction of the department of transportation, only at crossings or intersections designated for that purpose. 
(6)  Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized streets and those areas accessible by the public during daylight hours (30 minutes before sunrise until 30 minutes after sunset) unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or any person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise directing the use of such cart to operate or permit the operator of any such cart to drive over the streets or those areas accessible by the public in the city in violation of this section. 
(d)  Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(1)  Streets and areas accessible by the public in the city are for public transportation and public use. Motorized carts shall not engage in hazardous activities on the streets and those areas accessible to the public in the city. Such hazardous activities and the special rules pertaining to them include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city. 
b.  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(2)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the use of motorized carts on the streets and those areas accessible to the public in the city. For instance, the motorized cart shall be operated on the right of the center of the street. Passing shall be on the left side of the street. 
(3)  Pedestrians shall be given due consideration and right-of-way by operators of motorized carts. Operators of motorized carts shall give a warning or announcement, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. The warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that motorized cart operators equip their vehicles with a warning device such as a horn or bell. Every operator of a motorized cart shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users on the street and other areas accessible to the public in the city. Dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(4)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to other traffic on the streets and other areas accessible to the public in the city shall apply to operators and passengers of motorized carts. 
(5)  All litter from motorized carts shall be deposited in the proper receptacles. 
(e)  Liability. The registered owner of a motorized cart is liable for his actions and the actions of those he allows to use his motorized cart on the streets and other areas accessible to the public in the city. Liability insurance varies, and each person operating a motorized cart on the streets and other areas accessible to the public in the city should verify their coverage. 
(Code 2004, § 71.06; Ord. No. 373, 9-12-2005) 
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Interfering with public utilities unlawful. 
Whoever intentionally and without authority injures or destroys any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of public services, gas, light, power, water, wastewater, solid waste or communication, or intentionally and without authority prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of services supplied, or in any way interferes with the proper action or just registration, or without the consent of the company, intentionally diverts any services of the company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority uses or causes to be used, without the consent of the company, any services manufactured or distributed by the company shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person receiving the benefit of the services without proper charge as a result of the tampering with a meter or the diversion of services shall be presumed to be responsible for the acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 2004, § 50.01; Ord. No. 307, 11-13-1989) 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, see Ga. Const., art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

Sec. 26-21. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "municipal sanitation ordinance" of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-1; Code 2004, § 51.01; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored for collection. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-2; Code 2004, § 51.02; Ord. No. 232, 10-14-1974; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-23. - Collection by city or its authorized agents. 
(a)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or by the party as may have contracted with the city for that purpose. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying, and disposing of the refuse. 
(c)  This article shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside of the city from hauling the refuse over city streets, provided the collectors comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law or ordinances. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-3; Code 2004, § 51.03; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-24. - Preparation of refuse; containers. 
(a)  All garbage, ashes, and rubbish shall be placed in garbage cans for collection. 
(b)  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, and similar material shall be cut to length not to exceed four feet before being deposited for collection. 
(c)  All garbage can containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises and shall be maintained in good condition. Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this article or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The city manager shall have authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith. All garbage containers shall be equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers and shall be watertight and shall be kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times. 
(d)  Garbage shall be drained and wrapped. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to permit refuse, except bulky rubbish, to accumulate on any premises except in containers which are approved by the mayor and council, in accordance with the specifications contained in this section. 
(f)  Ashes containing hot embers shall not be placed in containers for collection. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove covers, overturn, or otherwise damage receptacles or create litter or health problems. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-5; Code 2004, § 51.05; Ord. No. 232, 10-14-1974; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-25. - Refuse maintained on property. 
(a)  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by the person or not, within the city, except it be in proper containers for collection or in some manner approved by the city manager. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, abandon, or leave, keep, or store, or suffer or permit the placement, abandonment, leaving, keeping, or storage of nonfunctioning motor vehicles and/or appliances, out of doors upon any public or private land within the city. 
(1)  Whenever it shall appear to the city manager that this section is being violated, he shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate the violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming location, or into an enclosed garage, barn, or other building within ten days of the notice. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall devise a method to periodically inspect each and every premises within the city in such a manner as to systematically locate existing nonfunctioning motor vehicles and/or appliances and require the removal thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-6; Code 2004, § 51.06; Ord. No. 232, 10-14-1974; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-26. - Placement of containers. 
All refuse containers shall be placed for collection at curbside on the day of collection. Refuse containers shall be moved behind the properties after they have been serviced. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-7; Code 2004, § 51.07; Am. Ord. No. No. 387, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 26-27. - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Refuse accumulated by residences shall be collected at least twice each week. 
(b)  Food handlers, including meat markets, restaurants, lunchrooms, hotels, and the other commercial establishments or businesses engaged in serving meals, shall be collected once each day Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Where necessary to protect the public health, the city manager shall have authority to require more frequent collections. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-8; Code 2004, § 51.08; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-28. - Special collection problems. 
(a)  Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in any containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the city manager at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(b)  Removal of wearing, bedding or other refuse from homes or places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-9; Code 2004, § 51.09; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-29. - Collection charges. 
(a)  Collection of a reasonable accumulation of refuse for each residential unit or commercial establishment during a collection period will be made for the standard charge as determined by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Greater than reasonable quantities of ashes, garbage, refuse, and rubbish shall be collected with a fee as shall be prescribed by the city manager. In all events, special fees to be fixed by the city manager shall be charged for removal, collection, and disposal of any abandoned vehicle or appliance which cannot be easily and conveniently lifted by one person. 
(c)  All fees and charges hereby fixed or imposed by the city manager shall be due on the tenth day of the month. Failure to receive bills or notices will not permit the bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. 
(d)  Should any person, firm or corporation liable for the payment of any fees and charges hereby fixed and imposed fail to pay the same within 20 days after having been billed therefor, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to same and the city shall, at its option, issue an execution therefor against the person, firm or corporation in the same manner provided in cases of default in the payment of city water bills, which the executions shall be delivered for levy and sale as provided by law. 
(e)  The failure or refusal of any person liable for payment of fees and charges hereby fixed and imposed to accept or take advantage of any one or more of the services herein provided shall not relieve the person of the obligation to pay the fees and charges. 
(f)  All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of services without notice and the stoppage of services shall be in addition to all other rights of the city to proceed for collection of unpaid charges in the manner as provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-10; Code 2004, § 51.10; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-30. - Collection outside city. 
The city shall collect, convey, and dispose of garbage, rubbish, ashes, and refuse in the areas outside the city as may from time to time be authorized and directed by the mayor and council under the supervision of the city manager, which service, when authorized and directed, shall be performed for a standard fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. The fees shall be due and collectible under the same terms and provisions as fees for the services are due and collectible within the city limits as herein provided. 
(Code 1985, § 4-2-11; Code 2004, § 51.11; Ord. No. 251, 3-19-1979) 
Sec. 26-31. - Collection by city. 
The city shall collect trash, debris, trees, and limbs throughout the city to be disposed of in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2004, § 51.25; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-32. - Schedule for trash collection. 
The scheduled days for trash collection shall be Monday through Wednesday. The scheduled day for furniture and appliances shall be on Friday. 
(Code 2004, § 51.26; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-33. - Work orders required for collection of furniture and appliances. 
Prior to placing furniture and appliances out for removal by the city, the occupant shall advise the city of same and request that a work order be issued. Work orders shall be required before the collection of furniture and appliances. The city shall issue these work orders to assist in maintaining an accurate record of the quantity of these items collected and to ensure the orderly collection of the materials. 
(Code 2004, § 51.27; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-34. - Containers required for trash and debris. 
(a)  Trash and debris shall not be placed in plastic bags, paper bags, boxes, and the like. As used in this section, the term "trash and debris" means a reasonable amount of grass, leaves, shrubbery trimmings, brush and similar materials, exclusive of the items listed hereafter. 
(b)  The city shall not remove amounts of trash and debris deemed excessive by the city manager. If the occupant desires for the city to remove excessive debris, a fee as established by the mayor and council and provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged. This fee shall be billed on the occupant's utility bill and shall be paid in accordance with the rules and regulations for payment of utility services. 
(Code 2004, § 51.28; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-35. - Collection of construction and remodeling materials. 
The city shall not be responsible for the removal or collection of construction and remodeling materials. As used in this section, construction and remodeling materials includes, without limitation, sheet rock, plaster, lumber, bricks, vinyl siding, roofing materials, and the like. The contractor and/or occupant shall be responsible for removal and collection of these materials. 
(Code 2004, § 51.29; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-36. - Collection of trees, limbs and debris. 
The city shall not be responsible for the removal and collection of trees, limbs and all debris resulting from fallen and cut trees which weigh more than 50 pounds, are more than four feet long, or are more than four inches in diameter. Removal of the items shall be the responsibility of the tree surgeons, contractors and/or occupant. 
(Code 2004, § 51.30; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-37. - Collection of tree stumps, batteries, tires and the like. 
The city shall not be responsible for the removal or collection of tree stumps, batteries, old tires, paper, oil, gas, paint, chemicals and other items presently or hereafter regulated by the state environmental protection division (EPD). The contractor and/or occupant shall be responsible for the removal and collection of these items. 
(Code 2004, § 51.31; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-38. - Cleaning of property at owner's expense; violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in the streets, gutters, sidewalks, ditches or other areas designated for collection any trash, debris, limbs or trees except as provided herein. This includes excessive amounts of trash and debris as defined in this article. In the event the city manager discovers that litter not eligible for collection by the city is placed on private property within the city limits, the city shall leave a written notice at the property which notifies the owner of his responsibility to dispose of material. In the event the litter is not disposed of according to this article within ten days of the written notice, the city shall have the option, but shall not be required, to collect and dispose of the material, with cost of the collection and disposal billed to the property owner or other responsible party. The cost shall be billed on the occupant's water bill and shall be paid in accordance with the rules and regulations for payment of water bills. 
(b)  In the event the property owner does not have utility service with the city, the city shall after ten days of billing, execute a lien against the property upon which the service is rendered for the cost thereof, and the execution shall constitute a lien against the property until fully paid and satisfied. The execution may be enforced in the same manner, and with the addition of interest and costs, as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for property taxes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person/occupant to haul into the city limits trash, debris, and yard clippings, and place by curbside for pick-up. 
(Code 2004, § 51.32; Ord. No. 328, 2-10-1996; Am. Ord. No. 361, 8-11-2003) 
Secs. 26-39—26-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-65. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  The water and sewer rate schedules for the city is established and amended from time to time by the mayor and council. Current copies of the rate schedule are maintained in the office of the city manager where they are available for public inspection. 
(b)  The rate schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one-commercial operation. Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and council on recommendation of the city's engineer. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-1; Code 2004, § 52.01; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Res. 378, 1-9-2006; Am. Ord. No. 1718, 12-21-2017) 
Sec. 26-66. - Application for water service. 
The resident shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at city hall. There will be a one-time account set-up fee charged for the cost of setting up each new service, re-establishment of service, and for temporary service. This fee shall be set by the city manager after consultation with the mayor and city council, and may be amended from time to time for water service and for sewer service. A picture ID and proof of residency will be required at the time of application. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-2; Code 2004, § 52.02; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Ord. No. 474, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 26-67. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
Charges for initial water and sewer service shall be set by the city manager after consultation with the mayor and city council, and may be amended from time to time. The fee structure established by the city manager may set three separate zones with each zone having a distinct charge amount: 
(1)  Inside the city limits; 
(2)  Outside of the city limits but in existing service area; and 
(3)  Outside city limits in area not currently served. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-3; Code 2004, § 52.03; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Ord. No. No. 368, 3-14-2005; Am. Ord. No. 473, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 26-68. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for the connection subscribed. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-4; Code 2004, § 52.04; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981) 
Sec. 26-69. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 26-67, will be made for a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee referenced above, as established by the city council on a case-by-case basis considering the cost to the city for installing same will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render the service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-5; Code 2004, § 52.05; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981) 
Sec. 26-70. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of its household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, nor for other purposes other than consumption and/or fire protection, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of human resources. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-6; Code 2004, § 52.06; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Ord. No. 286, —) 
Sec. 26-71. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-7; Code 2004, § 52.07; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981) 
Sec. 26-72. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-8; Code 2004, § 52.08; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981) 
Sec. 26-73. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on the day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent the bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Accounts not paid within 15 days from the billing date will be subject to a ten percent penalty. All payments must be received by 5:00 p.m. on the 15th day of the month in order to avoid penalty. 
(2)  Nonpayment of utility bills by the 25th day of the month will result in water service shut off from the water user's property. No second notice will be given. A delinquent fee will be charged to all accounts to be cut off for nonpayment. These fees will be added to the accounts at the time that the account list is sent out. These fees shall be set by the city manager consultation with the mayor and city council and may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Nonpayments for 60 days after the original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in that event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, not the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, including the delinquent fee for each meter to be reconnected. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-9; Code 2004, § 52.09; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Ord. No. No. 357, 4-1-2003; Am. Ord. No. 474, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 26-74. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued, a final bill will be generated from the last meter usage reading up to the point of disconnection. Nonpayment of any unpaid balance or final bills will result in the city proceeding with procedures as provided by law for the collection of debts. 
(b)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; and/or 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-10; Code 2004, § 52.10; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981; Am. Ord. No. 474, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 26-75. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay the bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for such a fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council; provided, however, that if the special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-11; Code 2004, § 52.11; Ord. No. 229, 6-11-1973; Ord. No. 234A, 1-13-1975; Am. Ord. No. 258, 5-11-1981) 
Sec. 26-76. - Prerequisites to establishment of wells and private water systems. 
(a)  Wells as only source of potable water. No well or private water system shall be established to serve as the only source of potable water until application for a permit therefor shall have first been made and approval thereof shall have been obtained from the county board of health and the mayor and council. Upon approval, all standards and recommendations of the state department of human resources shall apply. 
(b)  Wells in addition to potable water source. Where the city's public water system provides potable water, private wells may not be established for potable water purposes, but may be established for other specific purposes. 
(c)  Guidelines. The following guidelines shall govern the application for and approval of a permit to drill or dig a private well. 
(1)  A building permit to drill or dig a private well shall be applied for and, upon approval, issued. 
(2)  In addition to a building permit, electrical and plumbing permits shall be required. Costs of these permits shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(3)  A private well shall be considered an accessory use as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city and shall meet all location requirements. 
(4)  Well construction shall comply with state department of human resources recommendations. 
(5)  An approved backflow preventer shall be installed at the water meter on the customer side at the customer's expense. 
(6)  The water system fed by the well shall not be connected to the city's system at any time. The principal user of the property shall continue to use the city's water system as its only source of potable water. The property owner is directly responsible for the prevention of any crossover connection. 
(7)  Water from the well system shall not be discharged into the city's sanitary sewerage system. 
(8)  Each well system shall be made available for immediate inspection by the city at any time and without prior notice. 
(Code 1985, § 5-1-12; Code 2004, § 52.12; Ord. No. 265, 5-10-1982) 
Secs. 26-77—26-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 26-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through the system. The term "customer" includes the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific runoff and sewage. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the mayor and city council 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic and sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pit privy means shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. See Wastewater. 
Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Slug means discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the city manager or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by the EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community from the standpoint of source. It may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 2004, § 54.01; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-97. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. The city manager may waive the requirement to connect to the public sewer when the cost of making such a connection exceeds the normal connection costs reasonably anticipated by the property owner 
(f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer, provided that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Code 2004, § 54.02; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-98. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 26-97, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the city and the state department of human resources. 
(b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for the work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of human resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of the same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(f)  At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(g)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(h)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of the facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(i)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(j)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(k)  Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system: 
(1)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw, or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catch basin or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewer, or other similar matter. 
(2)  Permits. The superintendent is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under his supervision. The permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the superintendent, continued dumping of the matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(3)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of the dumpings, statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of the statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within the ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(l)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt or written notification from the health officer that the system is not functioning in a sanitary manner and order that the system be corrected. 
(m)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(n)  No statement contained in this section shall be constructed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 2004, § 54.03; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-99. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as specified elsewhere shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All cost and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within city supervision. 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal: ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal: or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the superintendent where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of the four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth-inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
a.  Push-on joints for cast soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM-C-564. 
b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use, installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
e.  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees and install a 45 degree elbow with the spigot and cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless the connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(l)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All the connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(m)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer; 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Code 2004, § 54.04; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-100. - Malicious damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncovered, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 2004, § 54.05; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-101. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 2004, § 54.06; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-102. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
(Code 2004, § 54.07; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-103. - Service charges. 
It is determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. The charges shall be published separate from this article and the revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement, and other authorized expenses. 
(Code 2004, § 54.08; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-104. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; or 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 26-116. 
(Code 2004, § 54.09; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-105. - Conflicts. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Code 2004, § 54.10; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-106. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters the stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 2004, § 54.25; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-107. - Limited discharges. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will harm neither the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher; 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin; 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius); 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
(5)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403) and the industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug, as defined in section 26-96; 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
(10)  Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes; 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, cyanuric wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in the quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(Code 2004, § 54.26; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-108. - City's response to discharges. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above and which in the judgement of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(Code 2004, § 54.27; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-109. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 2004, § 54.28; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-110. - Observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. 
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with the necessary and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 2004, § 54.29; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-111. - Compliance by industrial users. 
(a)  The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewater; 
(3)  Wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(Code 2004, § 54.30; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-112. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Code 2004, § 54.31; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-113. - Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 54.32; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-114. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
(a)  Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat the wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the superintendent or the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted and approved by the superintendent, the facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. 
(b)  Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum. 
(1)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plan shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to ensure compliance with the above regulations at all times. 
(2)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(3)  Maintenance at owner's expense. All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 2004, § 54.33; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-115. - Waiver of requirements. 
There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this article, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the superintendent who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials shall be considered as a violation of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 54.34; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-116. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows. A written notice, signed by the superintendent, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Code 2004, § 54.35; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-117. - Responsibilities of person discharging waste. 
It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)  Build a control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary the city. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected; 
(2)  Contact the superintendent prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling; 
(3)  Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loading as detailed in the city user charge system. 
(Code 2004, § 54.36; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
Sec. 26-118. - Violations. 
(a)  In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of the notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of the owners to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or city pursuant to this article will constitute a separate misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state; provided further, that compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided by chapter 1, the violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. The actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that the violation also constitutes a crime and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. The actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(d)  Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city order. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The demand must be filed with the city manager and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time and place for the hearing to be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of the demand. The hearing, as provided herein, shall apply to any customer's complaint dispute, or challenge of the city rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies. Upon the customer's written complaint filed with the city manager, the city shall set a hearing as provided herein or at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(e)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to this article shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(f)  For the purpose of this article, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Code 2004, §§ 54.39, 54.98; Ord. No. 356, 8-26-2002) 
PART III - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 100 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 100-1. - Title. 
The title of this part shall be known as the "Land Development Code of Harlem, Georgia." This part may also be cited as the "Land Development Code" or the "LDC." 
Sec. 100-2. - Applicability of part II, chapter 1. 
Unless otherwise stated or where the context of the provision clearly shows a different intent, the provisions of chapter 1, under part II of this Code of Ordinances, shall apply to the chapters contained in this part. 
Sec. 100-3. - Fee requirements. 
Reasonable fees to offset the costs of administration of this part may be set by the mayor and council, unless otherwise provided, and maintained on file with the city manager. 
Sec. 100-4. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Where general requirements of a provision under this Code or the land development code conflict with a specific requirement of a provision under the land development code including, but not limited to, building and construction regulations, coastal zone management regulations, drainage and flood control, planning and development, and subdivision regulations, then the provision concerning the specific requirement under the land development code shall prevail. 
(b)  In the event that a provision or requirement under this Code or the land development code in any way conflicts with another provision or requirement under the land development code, then the more stringent provision or requirement shall prevail. 
Sec. 100-5. - Interpretation, application and jurisdiction. 
In interpreting and applying the land development code, the requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the stated purposes. Except as herein provided, this title shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits of any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this title shall govern as provided below. 
Sec. 100-6. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  Promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the city and to guide future growth in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  Prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land. 
(4)  Ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and transportation facilities. 
(5)  Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(6)  Establish procedures for the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in order to further the orderly development of land. 
(7)  Provide for the proper documenting of subdivided land and proper legal descriptions. 
(8)  Help eliminate the costly maintenance problems that develop when streets and lots are established without proper consideration given to various public purposes. 
(9)  Facilitate and inform lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Code 2004, § 152.003; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 100-7. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well-defined and fixed boundaries. (See figure 2.2.A.) 

Figure 2.2.A. Block
Building permit means formal permission from the city to start any construction project. The issuance of a building permit indicates that plans for a new structure, addition, renovation, foundation, plumbing, prefabricated structure, temporary building or manufactured home have been approved by local government officials and that the plans comply with all applicable provisions of the land development code. 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Comprehensive plan means any plan adopted by the mayor and city council, or portion of such plan. The term "comprehensive plan" shall be construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a comprehensive plan as provided by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, if formally adopted by the local city council. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building. The installation of certain infrastructure improvements on land associated with the subdivision of land. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Development means any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, installation of utilities, drainage facilities or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Easement means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. (See figure 2.2.C.) 

Figure 2.2.C. Easement
Health department means the health department of the county. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other tract or parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. 
Open space means land that forms a permanent, undivided or relatively undivided, undeveloped area. As much as 25 percent of the open space may be devoted to active recreational facilities, as defined. Easements for electric transmission lines or any other aboveground improvement shall not be considered open space. Stormwater management features, such as lakes, ponds, and ways, may be considered open space at the discretion of the community development coordinator, provided that such areas are designed and maintained in a manner that contributes to open space and the aesthetics of the subdivision. 
Open space, public, means an area within a development or subdivision designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general. 
Owner means a person having a majority fee simple interest in real property, or a majority interest through any other form of ownership. 
Planning and zoning commission means the city planning and zoning commission. 
Plat means a map or drawing indicating the subdivision, re-subdivision, or recombination of land. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Right-of-way means: 
(1)  A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use. 
(2)  Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
Road may be used interchangeably with the term "street." 
Street means any vehicular way, other than an alley, that: 
(1)  Is an existing federal, state, county or municipal roadway; 
(2)  Is constructed as shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law and is open to vehicle travel; 
(3)  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the mayor and city council; or 
(4)  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel and shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the clerk's office, county superior court, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, shall be considered part of the street. 
Subdivider means any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision means: 
(1)  Any division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels. The term "subdivision" means the act or process of dividing property. The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
(2)  Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, roads, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and drainageways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the city. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. 
(Code 2004, §§ 155.11, 152.005, 53.02; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013; Am. Ord. No. 458, 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. No. 468, 7-28-2014; Am. Ord. No. 479, 1-26-2015; Am. Ord. No. 488, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 100-8. - Duties of the community development coordinator. 
Unless otherwise provided, this land development code shall be administered and enforced by the community development director and/or the community development director. The duties of the community development director shall include: 
(1)  The examination of applications pertaining to the use of land, buildings, and/or structures within the city limits; issuing administrative decisions regarding whether the proposed uses conform with the provisions of this land development code; and issuing certain permits, approval and denials as authorized by this land development code. 
(2)  Conducting such inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land as are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this land development code and this Code. 
(3)  Maintaining permanent and current zoning map and amendments. 
(4)  Any other duties as provided for in this Code or this land development code or as delegated by the city manager from time to time. 
Chapter 102 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Property maintenance code adopted. 
(a)  Code adopted. The International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code council, adopted by the state department of community affairs (including amendments), and inspected by the county building standards department or city, is adopted as the code of the city relating to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems and the whole thereof, except the portions as are hereafter deleted, altered or amended, is incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length, and all persons related to the mechanical business shall be required to make installations in conformity with the code and the regulations contained therein, a copy of which is on file in the office of the community development director. In the event of any conflict with the provisions of the mechanical code, the provisions of this Code, state law or any other rules or regulations, the provisions imposing the most restrictive terms shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes. 
(1)  Sections 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 111, and 112 are deleted in their entirety. 
(2)  Section 110.1 is amended to read as follows: "The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option, or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than one year, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official." 
(3)  Sections 110.2, 110.3, and 110.4 are deleted in their entirety. 
(4)  Section 302.4 Insert "12 inches." 
(5)  Section 304.14 Insert "April 1st and October 1st." 
(6)  Section 602.4 Insert "October 1st and April 1st." 
(7)  Appendix A—Boarding Standard is adopted. 
(Code 1985, § 6-2-61; Code 2004, § 150.07; Ord. No. 465, 5-29-2014; Am. Ord. No. 1713, 9-25-2017) 
Sec. 102-2. - International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted. 
(a)  Code adopted. There is adopted by and for the city the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as published by the International Code council, adopted by the state department of community affairs (including amendments), and inspected by the county building standards department or city, which code is published in book form, which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which code is filed of record in the office of the community development director, the provisions of which shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the housing code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
(1)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this housing code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointing authority means the mayor and council. 
Code official means the city building official. 
(2)  The mayor and city council shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the board of appeals. 
(Code 2004, § 150.09; Ord. No. 1713, 9-25-2017) 
Sec. 102-3. - International Wildland-Urban Interface Code. 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2018 edition, published by the International Code Council in its entirety except for section 602 automatic sprinkler systems. Furthermore, any future revisions or updates to the code shall be adopted in perpetuity by the city unless otherwise set forth in future amendments to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1810, 6-18-2018) 
Sec. 102-4. - Water conservation plan adopted by reference. 
The comprehensive water conservation plan, set forth in Ordinance No. 316, adopted May 13, 1991, is adopted by reference and included as a part of this Code as if set out at full herein. 
(Code 2004, § 53.01; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. No. 346, 6-15-2000) 
Sec. 102-5. - Construction restrictions. 
(a)  No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when the repair or renovation of or addition to the existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 2004, § 53.03; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Sec. 102-6. - Exemptions. 
New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within the existing buildings; 
(2)  When the plumbing or sewage system within the existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; 
(3)  The system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in the individual's personal residence; 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles; or 
(5)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption, as specified in this section, shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee, as established by the mayor and council and provided in the city fee schedule, shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of the exemption. 
(Code 2004, § 53.04; Ord. No. 316, 5-13-1991) 
Secs. 102-7—102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS 

Sec. 102-31. - Applicability of standards. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all structures in the city containing one or more rental dwelling units and to all dwelling units which are either rented for human habitation or permitted by the owner thereof to be occupied for human habitation by a person other than the owner thereof. Every building or structure, or part thereof, rented for use in whole or part as a home or residence of a single-family or person, and every building or part thereof rented for use as a home or residence of two or more persons or families living in separate apartments, shall conform to the requirements of this article, regardless of the class to which the building may otherwise belong, and regardless of when the building may have been constructed, altered or repaired. 
(b)  This article establishes minimum standards for the human habitation or occupancy of rental premises in the city and does not replace or modify the standards otherwise established for the construction, replacement or repair of buildings contained in the building ordinances of the city, except such as are in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 90.01; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 102-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling unit means any room or suite of rooms with facilities for regular cooking and occupied by a person or a family. 
Family means a group of persons, not necessarily related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Habitable building means any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a home or place of abode by one or more persons. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation who alone, or jointly or severally with others, shall own or have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit within the city as owner, employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate, or person of, the title holder; and all other persons shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. 
Public hall means a hall, corridor or passageway not within the exclusive control of one family. 
Rented premises means all premises which are actually rented under verbal or written lease to one or more tenants and also to the use of premises by one or more persons other than the owner thereof, who may be permitted by the owner to occupy the premises rent-free or without consideration being paid to the owner for the use. 
(Code 2004, § 90.02; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 102-33. - Standards. 
All rented premises occupied for human habitation shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Area of floor space. 
a.  A minimum of 100 square feet of floor space per adult shall be provided in each dwelling unit. 
b.  A minimum of 50 square feet of floor space per child six years of age or older shall be provided in each dwelling unit. 
c.  A minimum of 300 square feet of floor space shall be provided for each single-family dwelling unit. 
d.  A minimum of 600 square feet of floor space shall be provided for each two-family dwelling unit. 
e.  A minimum of 200 square feet of floor space per family shall be provided in multifamily dwelling units housing three or more families. 
f.  In computing area only that area having a ceiling height of seven or more feet shall enter into the computation. 
(2)  Sanitary conditions and facilities. 
a.  At least one flush-type toilet shall be provided for each single- and two-family dwelling unit. 
b.  At least one flush-type toilet shall be provided for every eight adult persons in roominghouses and in multifamily dwelling structures housing three or more families. 
c.  The necessary number of flush-type toilets may be provided in a separate building outside of, or separate from, the building containing the dwelling units if the separate building is constructed and maintained in conformity with the health, plumbing and building ordinances of the city and if the building is provided with windows, ventilating shaft or mechanical ventilating equipment sufficient to ensure adequate ventilation thereof. 
d.  Running water shall be provided for each dwelling unit and for each flush-type toilet. 
e.  An outlet for sanitary sewage shall be provided for each dwelling unit in conformance with existing ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Windows and ventilation. 
a.  Windows with a total glass area equal to at least ten percent of the floor area of a habitable room shall be provided. The window shall open onto a street, yard, alley, court or easement or to the sky and shall be so constructed so that at least one-half of the glass area may be fully opened and so that the sash can be opened or securely closed. 
b.  Rooms or dwelling units not conforming to the standards set forth in subsection (3)a in this section may in the alternative be provided with artificial ventilation facilities sufficient to ensure adequate ventilation thereof. The artificial ventilation facilities must be approved by the building inspector. 
c.  Inside bathrooms, not provided with windows, shall be provided with a ventilating shaft, or sufficient mechanical ventilating equipment to ensure adequate ventilation therein. Installations of ventilating equipment must be approved by the building inspector. 
(4)  Electrical facilities. Each dwelling unit is to have electrical facilities consisting of one 20-ampere circuit for convenience outlets in kitchen and dining areas and at least one additional circuit for lighting. The electrical facilities shall be installed or made to conform with the standard provided in the electrical ordinance of the city. 
(5)  Heating. A vent or flue shall be provided so that all heating units using combustible materials may be connected thereto in conformity with the standards provided in the fire and building ordinances of the city. 
(6)  Exits. 
a.  At least one exterior door shall be provided for each single-family dwelling unit. 
b.  Two exterior doors shall be provided for each two-family dwelling unit with floor space exceeding 500 square feet, for each two-family dwelling unit, and for each multifamily dwelling unit of one-story housing three or more families. 
c.  In addition to the requirements provided for in subsection (6)b of this section, a direct exit shall be provided for each floor of each multifamily dwelling unit of three or more stories. 
d.  The exterior doors or exits required in this article may be provided in or from a public hall, but in that event each dwelling unit shall be provided with one exit door to the public hall or directly to the outside for every 500 square feet of floor space in the dwelling unit. 
(Code 2004, § 90.03; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 102-34. - Nuisance. 
Any habitable building which shall fail to conform to the standards set forth in this article shall be deemed a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 90.04; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 102-35. - Duty of owner when property is vacated. 
Whenever a dwelling unit is vacated it shall be the duty of the owner to determine that the dwelling unit is in a clean, sanitary and habitable condition, free from infestation, before renting the dwelling unit to another occupant. Where necessary, the owner shall renovate or paint walls and ceilings and exterminate vermin in the vacated dwelling units before offering them for rent. 
(Code 2004, § 90.05; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Sec. 102-36. - Inspection. 
Any officer or employee of the city charged with the duty of inspecting buildings, fire hazards, health conditions, or plumbing and electrical installations may inspect and examine and shall be authorized to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour to determine whether the building, structure or premises conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 90.06; Ord. No. 311, 4-9-1990) 
Chapter 104 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 104-1. - Authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-l-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2004, § 154.01; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(1)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 19, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
(2)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 19, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(3)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in an FIS. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Hall, 320 N. Louisville St., Harlem, Georgia 30814. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 2004, § 154.02; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the community development director's or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 104-2(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced before January 28, 1977, the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 28,1977 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). NGVD, as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after January 28, 1977, the effective date of the initial FIRM, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after January 28, 1977, the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after January 28, 1977, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). The NAVD has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction. The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: the market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed; or 
(3)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
(Code 2004, § 154.03; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Secs. 104-4—104-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 104-25. - Designation of community development director. 
The community development director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. However, the community development director may designate another city official or employee to implement and administer the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 154.10; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-26. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the community development director or his designee on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 104-59(1); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The community development director or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Code 2004, § 154.11; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-27. - Duties and responsibilities of the community development director. 
Duties of the community development director or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 104-59, then the community development director or his designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 104-60 et seq. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 104-26(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 104-26(b)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the community development director or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 104-26(b)(1)(c) and 104-59(b) or 104-61(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process; ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the community development director or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the community development director or his designee and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 2004, § 154.12; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Secs. 104-28—104-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 104-58. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 2004, § 154.20; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-59. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 104-58(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in Al-30, AE, or AH Zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 104-27(5). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 104-58(5)). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction'" including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)(a) and (c) of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 104-2(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 104-60 et seq. 
(Code 2004, § 154.21; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-60. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 104-2(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 104-2(b), then the community development director or his designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 104-59 et seq. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 104-58(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b.  The community development director or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 2004, § 154.22; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-61. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 104-2(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 104-2(b). 
(Code 2004, § 154.23; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-62. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 104-2(b), may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  Lowest floor. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 104-58(4). 
b.  The community development director or his designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 104-26(b)(1)(c). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 2004, § 154.24; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-63. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Code 2004, § 154.25; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-64. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 2004, § 154.26; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Secs. 104-65—104-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 104-87. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission, as established by the city council, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the community development director or his designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the community development director or his designee may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 154.35; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Sec. 104-88. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The community development director or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning and zoning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 154.36; Ord. No. 442, 4-18-2011) 
Chapter 106 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 153.01; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. In addition, any terms used in this chapter that are defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22 et seq., shall have the meaning prescribed by statute unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to an historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features mean the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features mean all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. An historic district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. An historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as an historic district pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as an historic property pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within an historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of an historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of an historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment; a work of art. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Work of art means any structure, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the municipality, county, state, or region for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the municipality, county, state, or region; or 
(4)  It is a site of natural or esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state, or region. 
(Code 2004, § 153.02; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-3. - Amendments. 
These rules may, within the limits allowed by law, be amended at any time by an affirmative vote of a majority of the commission, provided that the amendment shall have first been presented to the membership in writing at a regular meeting preceding the meeting at which the vote is taken. 
(Code 2004, § 153.26; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Secs. 106-4—106-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment of historic preservation commission, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24. 

Sec. 106-25. - Historic preservation commission established; duties. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be the "Harlem historic preservation commission." 
(b)  Commission position within the city. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of the commission's powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the state Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make the investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the city Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Code 2004, § 153.03; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-26. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (for example, contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of an historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause the area, by reason of the factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of an historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating the districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section). 
(c)  Designation of an historic property. An historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, city or the state, for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts. An historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties. An historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of the designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the properties. All the notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the commission must submit the report required in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of the designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Code 2004, § 153.04; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-27. - General rules. 
The historic preservation commission shall be governed by the terms of this article and the membership, meeting requirements, and all other procedures as provided by this article. 
(Code 2004, § 153.21; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-28. - Jurisdiction. 
The city's jurisdiction for requiring certificates of appropriateness as required by this article shall be delineated on the official zoning map on file in the office of the community development director. 
(Code 2004, § 153.22; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-29. - Members, officers and duties. 
(a)  General. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Chairperson. A chairperson shall be elected by the commission from among its members. His term shall be for one year, and he shall be eligible for reelection. The chairperson shall preside over the commission and shall have the right to vote. The chairperson, subject to these rules, shall decide all points of procedure unless otherwise directed by a majority of the commission in session at the time. The chairperson shall appoint any committees found necessary to investigate any matters before the commission. 
(c)  Vice-chairperson. A vice-chairperson shall be elected by the commission from among its members. His term shall be for one year, and he shall be eligible for reelection. In the absence or disability of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson. 
(d)  Secretary. The secretary shall be elected by the commission from among its members. His term shall be for one year, and he shall be eligible for reelection. The secretary shall maintain the records and minutes of the commission. 
(e)  Elections. Terms of officers shall begin in January. 
(f)  Terms of appointment. Members shall be appointed to serve terms of three years in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Attendance at meetings. Any member who fails to attend any three consecutive commission meetings or any four meetings in any 12-month period without written excuse filed with the chairperson shall be replaced. 
(h)  Applications involving members. No commission member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or determination of any petition in which he is a party or has a financial interest. 
(Code 2004, § 153.23; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-30. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the commission shall be held on the fourth Thursday of the month at 6:30 p.m. at the public safety building, with a minimum of six meetings per year, or in any other designated place, provided the location is specified in all notices required by law. 
(b)  Called meetings. If a quorum is not present at a regular meeting of the commission, a special meeting shall be held within 14 calendar days from the scheduled meeting. 
(c)  Continuation of meetings. Nothing herein shall prohibit a continuation of the hearing on an application where the applicant consents. 
(d)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the commission members. 
(e)  Decisions of the commission. Decisions of the commission shall be by a majority vote of the members present. 
(f)  Conduct of meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Hearing of continued application; 
(2)  Hearing of new application; 
(3)  Reading of minutes of previous meeting; 
(4)  Old business; and 
(5)  New business. 
(g)  Visual compatibility factors. 
(1)  In reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall take into account the following visual compatibility factors: 
a.  Height; 
b.  Proportion of structure front facade; 
c.  Proportion of openings within the facade; 
d.  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facade; 
e.  Rhythm of structure on streets; 
f.  Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection; 
g.  Relationship of materials and texture; 
h.  Roof shapes; 
i.  Walls of continuity; 
j.  Scale of a building; and 
k.  Directional expression of front elevation. 
(2)  The commission may designate more explicit design criteria as it deems necessary. The commission shall not consider the interior arrangement of structures. The commission shall consider the following development standards. An historic structure and any outbuildings related thereto visible from a public street shall only be moved, reconstructed, or altered, in a manner that will preserve the historical and exterior architectural features of the historic structure. For the purpose of this article, exterior architectural features shall include, but not be limited to, the architectural style, scale, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of the structure, including the kind and texture of the building material, the type and style of all roofs, windows, doors, and signs. In considering proposals for the exterior alterations of historic structures and in applying the development standards, the documented original design of the structure may be considered. 
(h)  Consideration of applications. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney at the meeting. The order of business for consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chairperson calls the application by number and address according to the agenda and checks for conflicts of interest among commission members if applicable. 
(2)  The chairperson calls on the applicant for additional information or comments. 
(3)  The chairperson calls for other citizens who wish to comment for the record. 
(4)  The chairperson calls for discussion. 
(5)  The chairperson calls for motion that application for certificate of appropriateness be approved or denied, or approved subject to conditions, or continued for further information. Second motion. Discussion. Vote. 
(6)  The chairperson thanks applicant and informs him that he will be mailed the written decision by the commission. 
(i)  Precedent. No action of the commission shall establish a precedent. Each case shall be decided upon its merits using the ordinance. 
(j)  Minutes. Minutes shall be taken at each meeting of the commission, noting the vote by each member, those absent so marked. A summary of all pertinent discussions and actions taken by the commission during the course of its public meeting shall be recorded and kept in a well-bound book. 
(Code 2004, § 153.24; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002; Am. Ord. No. 416, 7-21-2008; Am. Ord. No. 464, 5-29-2014; Am. Ord. No. 481, 3-23-2015) 
Secs. 106-31—106-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 106-49. - Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of an historic district, no material change in the appearance of the historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within the historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effort on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and timeframe as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above-proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest of the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object form collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions, or to interpret the meaning of the provisions, so as to relieve the difficulty or hardship; provided the variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose the reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within an historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested the notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within the 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of the actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the community development director charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of the certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with the certificate, the community development director shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city council, shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to the historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced; expiration; renewal. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall permit work in compliance thereof for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. A renewal for a period of six months beyond the original 12-month period may be obtained upon submission of a request by the owner and issuance of approval in writing by the commission. Upon completion of construction of all work referenced in the application, the certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed closed. 
(l)  Amendments or modifications. Change work items or changes to approved plans must be submitted and approved by the community development director prior to beginning work on any aspect of that plan. The owner may submit a new application for a certificate of appropriateness or request administrative review of such modifications which meet the criteria set forth in this section. 
(m)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with the application. 
(n)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where the action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(o)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal the determination to the city council. 
(2)  Any appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section or, in the case of failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection (h)(2) of this section. 
(3)  The appeal shall be made in writing on an appeal form made available by the community development director and shall state the name and address of the person filing the appeal, the identification number of the certificate of appropriateness that is being appealed, a statement of facts upon which standing to file the appeal is based, and the grounds for which the determination of the commission should be denied by the city council, based on abuse of discretion by the commission. 
(4)  The city council shall hear the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least 15 days after the notice of appeal is received, but not more than 45 days. 
(5)  Notice of the hearing stating the location and time shall be mailed to the person who filed the appeal at least ten days but not more than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(6)  At least one week prior to the hearing, the city council and the appellant shall receive from the community development director a complete records of the commission's action, including all information presented by the applicant, proponents and opponents, staff, minutes of the public hearing before the commission, and all other evidence and documents considered by the commission in reaching their determination. 
(7)  The procedures for the conduct of the hearing before the city council are as follows: 
a.  The party who filed the appeal first presents a ten-minute argument in support of the appeal, and opponents shall then present their ten-minute argument in opposition to the appeal. 
b.  Neither side will be required to use all of its ten-minute argument period. 
c.  Either side may allocate its ten-minute argument period among any number of speakers, provided that the presentation by all speakers for each side shall not exceed ten minutes per side. 
d.  All persons wishing to speak during one side's ten-minute argument period must register their intent to do so and the amount of time to be allocated per speaker with the community development director not later than the time that the meeting of the city council at which the hearing on the appeal is to be conducted is first called to order. 
e.  After the opponents of the appeal have concluded their ten-minute arguments, the party who filed the appeal shall have a three-minute rebuttal. 
(8)  The hearing before the city council shall be confined to a review of the record of the commission's determination for error based on abuse of discretion of the commission. 
(9)  The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
(10)  Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations. 
(p)  Department of transportation and local governments. The department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this section. Local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness, provided, however, that local governments shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(q)  Administrative review; application modifications. To expedite the design review process, the commission may identify within its rules of procedure items and application modifications which qualify for administrative review. Applications may be submitted at any time and shall be accompanied by such elevations, drawings, photographs, or plans as may be required by the commission. Administrative review shall be limited to proposed work which constitutes either an identified administrative review item which clearly and distinctly complies with the established design criteria or a minor modification to a previously approved application for certificate of appropriateness which clearly and distinctly complies with the established design criteria. The administrative review shall follow the procedure set forth within the commission's adopted rules of procedure. All administrative review decisions shall be reported to the commission at the next regular meeting. 
(Code 2004, § 153.05; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002; Am. Ord. No. 463, 5-29-2014) 
Sec. 106-50. - Maintaining historic properties and buildings. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. The conditions such as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, and/or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of the property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be subject to the penalties as provided in this article and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform the maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of the maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 2004, § 153.06; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Sec. 106-51. - Signs in historic districts. 
(a)  Permitting of signs. In lieu of a certificate of appropriateness under this article, any person seeking to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, or change any sign or sign structure on a lot in an historic district shall be required to obtain a sign permit pursuant to the application procedures set forth in section 108-240. The community development director or his designee shall review all applications for signs submitted within an historic district under both the sign ordinance and all applicable historic district ordinances. Review under the historic district ordinances shall be limited to the physical features and location of the sign. All review under historic district ordinances shall be completed within the same timeframes and subject to the same appeal procedures as sign permits generally. 
(b)  Sign regulations. Signs erected on lots in historic districts shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Aggregate display area per lot. The aggregate display area for all signs on a lot in any historic district shall not exceed 90 square feet or 50 feet per acre, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Freestanding signs. One ground sign with a maximum display area of 30 square feet and a height of no more than five feet shall be permitted per lot in historic districts that are not located in the downtown area as delineated in design guidelines adopted by the city historic preservation commission. Freestanding signs shall be located in the front yard and shall be set back at least ten feet from the public right-of-way. Freestanding signs shall be constructed of painted wood or metal. 
(3)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted in all historic districts. A wall sign shall not have a display area that exceeds five percent of the area of the wall to which it is attached. Wall signs shall not be attached to a building in such a manner that they obscure or cover the architectural or historic features of the building. Wall signs may be located on industrial buildings on the parapet, the front wall near the doorway, or on blank walls. Wall signs may be located on commercial buildings in the sign board area, on awnings, or on canopies. Wall signs shall be constructed of painted wood or metal. Painted wall signs are also permitted on industrial buildings. 
(4)  Projecting or hanging signs. Projecting or hanging signs shall be permitted on commercial buildings in historic districts in the downtown area. The maximum display area for such signs shall be 12 square feet. Projecting and hanging signs shall be constructed of painted wood or metal. 
(5)  Window signs. Window signs are permitted in all historic districts. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the window. Window signs utilized for commercial or industrial properties shall be professionally prepared and conform to the design guidelines of the district prescribed by subsection (7) of this section. 
(6)  Lighting. Signs may only be indirectly illuminated with small, directional lighting that produces a limited pool of light. Lighting of freestanding signs shall be achieved only by use of ground spots located immediately adjacent to the sign. All forms of external lighting used to illuminate signs shall be adequately screened and shielded to prevent light from escaping onto adjacent properties. No sign shall be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the premises on which the sign is located is open for business. Direct illumination of signs is prohibited in all historic districts. 
(7)  Compliance with design guidelines. In addition to the requirements of this section, signs in historic districts shall be required to comply with the approved color palette, fonts, font sizes, and spacing, and sign shapes and forms set forth in the design guidelines and standards for the historic district in which the signs are located. 
(Code 2004, § 153.07; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 106-52. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Each application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made on an official application form and shall be made to the office of the community development director. 
(b)  All information called for in the application shall be furnished by the applicant as prescribed in the application. 
(c)  The secretary of the commission shall be responsible for the public notice requirements as required by this article. 
(d)  The community development director shall note date of receipt of application for certificate of appropriateness on the application and shall collect designated fees. The commission shall act upon all complete applications at the next scheduled meeting, or if a quorum is not present, at a special meeting held within 14 calendar days from the scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Applications, including continued applications, filed in proper form shall be placed on the agenda of the commission according to their serial number. Incomplete applications shall not receive a serial number nor be placed on the agenda until all information has been received. 
(f)  Construction for which a certificate of appropriateness is issued shall begin within six months from the date of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(g)  The secretary of the commission shall notify the applicant of the disposition of the application by mail and shall file a copy in the t office of community development director. If an application is denied, the notice shall include the reasons for the action. 
(h)  If the commission disapproved an application, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued. 
(Code 2004, § 153.25; Ord. No. 354-B, 4-8-2002) 
Chapter 108 - LAND USE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 108-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Harlem Land Use Ordinance." 
(Code 2004, § 152.001; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-2. - Jurisdiction. 
Unless this chapter clearly indicates otherwise, this chapter shall apply within the city limits in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-5. 
(Code 2004, § 152.002; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building. Accessory buildings include, but are not limited to, storage sheds, carports, detached garages, gazebos, pole barns, pool houses, and the like. 
Accessory structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building. Structures include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, decks, patios, and the like. 
Active recreational facilities means equipment and areas prepared for active use for recreational and leisure purposes, including, but not limited to, playground equipment (swing sets and climbing structures); courts for basketball, volleyball, and tennis; leveled, striped fields for football, soccer, or all-purpose fields; community picnic pavilion (including covered facilities with grills and/or fire pits); and community buildings for recreational events. Trails and bikeways through open spaces shall not be considered active recreational facilities. 
Alley means a strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a public road or street. 
Apartment means a room or suite of one or more rooms with a private bathroom which is designed or intended for occupancy by, or which is occupied by, one family doing its own cooking therein, or by one person doing his own cooking therein. 
Apartment house means any building or portion thereof which contains three or more apartments, the occupants of any two or more of which use any entrance or hall in common and all living units of which are intended to be maintained under single ownership. 
Architectural features mean ornamental or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall, including cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
Automobile salvage yard means any establishment which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying, repairing or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled vehicles or motor vehicle parts, including filling or gasoline stations with five or more inoperative automobiles or vehicles upon the premises of such business. 
Banner means a sign of paper, cloth, plastic or vinyl with no other substantial backing, not permanently affixed to any building or structure. 
Bay window means a window assembly whose maximum horizontal projection is not more than two feet from the vertical plane of an exterior wall and is elevated above the floor level of the home. 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well-defined and fixed boundaries. 

Figure 2.2.A. Block
Boardinghouse means a residential use consisting of at least one dwelling unit together with more than two rooms that are rented or are designed or intended to be rented but which rooms, individually or collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A roominghouse or boardinghouse is distinguished from a tourist home in that the former is designed to be occupied by longer-term residents (at least month-to-month tenants) as opposed to overnight or weekly guests. 
Body art, body art services or body art procedures means the practice of physical body adornment by means of tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. The term "body art, body art services or body art procedures" does not include practices considered medical procedures by the state board of registration in medicine. 
Body art establishment, body art studio, tattoo establishment, tattoo parlor or tattoo studio means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation in which all or any of these body art services are performed by a body artist or tattoo artist. 
Body artist or tattoo artist means a person who performs tattooing, body piercing or permanent cosmetics. This definition shall not include in its meaning any physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. ch. 34, title 43, nor shall it include any technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
Church means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
Code compliance certificate (CCC) means a certificate of compliance issued by the city manager for property that is located within the Downtown Commercial Overlay District pursuant to the applicant demonstrating compliance with all the requirements for this overlay as established by the city council or designee. 
Compatibility means, with regard to buildings, achieving harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Conditional use means a use not ordinarily permitted but which may be permitted upon the imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use; height, setback and other non-use requirements; physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. A conditional use must be approved by the planning commission prior to the issuance of a permit. 
Contiguous common parcels mean parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
Cul-de-sac means a dead-end street of limited length having a primary function of serving adjoining land, and constructed with a turnaround at its end. 

Figure 2.2.B. Cul-de-Sac
Cul-de-sac, temporary, means a nonpermanent vehicular turnaround located at the termination of a street or alley. 
Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the city engineer that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Display area means the area of the sign used for the purpose of displaying its message and content, excluding the base or support. Also referred to as the sign face or display surface. 
Donation bin means a publicly accessible bin or container made of steel, metal, or a similar durable product which is placed on private property by a private company or non-profit organization which is intended for the donation and temporary storage of clothing or other material. 
Dormer means a window projecting from a roof. 
Duplex means a structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively by individuals for no less than 30-day residential occupancy with complete cooking and sanitary facilities, excluding hotels, motels, boardinghouses, roominghouses, lodginghouse; and institutional care facilities. 
Dwelling, attached, means a dwelling unit connected to one or more dwelling units by common vertical walls and all dwelling units are located on a single, common lot. (See Duplex and Townhouse. ) 
Dwelling, detached, means a dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building containing three or more dwelling units on one lot. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms located within a dwelling that creates an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping. 

Figure 2.2.C. Easement
Easement means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. (See figure 2.2.C.) 
Eave means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Flag means any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government, entity, or other organization. 
Home business use means a detached single-family dwelling where a use, occupation or activity is conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
Hospital means an institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
Junkyard means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile salvage yard. 
Kennel, commercial, means the boarding, breeding, raising, grooming or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises and/or for commercial gain. 
Kennel, private, means the keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training of four or more dogs over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective. 
Light industry means a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging, where such manufacture takes place in a totally enclosed building. 
Loft apartment means a dwelling unit located in the upper story of a building where the ground floor is dedicated to commercial or institutional use. 
Lot area means the total area included within the front, side and rear lot lines. (See figure 2.2.E.) 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. (See figure 2.2.D.) 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See figure 2.2.E.) 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. (See figure 2.2.D.) 
Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. (See figure 2.2.D.) 

Figure 2.2.D. Lots
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street. (See figure 2.2.E.) The lot width in feet shown in table I. Area, yard and height requirements as found in section 108-66, general provisions, shall be the frontage dimension required on a public or private street to permit new construction. Should this requirement prove to be an undue hardship to a property owner, said property owner may request a variance to this requirement from the city planning and zoning commission. (See figure 2.2.E.) 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the clerk of the county superior court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot, through. See Lot, double frontage. 
Lot width means the shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required front building line, or in the absence of a front building line regulation, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line of the building located or intended to be located on the lot. (See figure 2.2.E.) 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of the term "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 USC 5401-5445). 

Figure 2.2.E. Lot Definitions
Manufactured home park means any property on which three or more manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, or combination thereof are located or intended to be located for purposes of residential or recreational occupancy of a temporary, seasonal, or permanent nature. A campground designed to serve recreational vehicles is also included in this definition. 
Manufactured home space means an area within a manufactured home park, distinguished from a lot in a subdivision under fee-simple ownership, upon which a single manufactured home or recreational vehicle is or may be placed. If designed for seasonal or permanent occupancy, a manufactured home space may provide area and be used for storing the belongings of the occupant. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including, without limitation, the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term "massage therapy" also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. The term "massage therapy" shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Mobile home. See Manufactured home. 
Natural conditions means the flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
Nudity. See definition at O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75(b)(1). 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful, shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Nursing care home means a facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital. 
Off-site means beyond the boundaries of the property in question. 
On-site means within the boundaries of the property in question. 
Planned center means a single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means a form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a slightly more dense setting than allowable on separate zoned lots. 
Recreation, active, means leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
Recreation, passive, means leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type, portable structure without a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and is primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use which includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. 
Reservation means a method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
Shade tree means a tree in a public place, street right-of-way, or special easement, planted to provide canopy that will obscure the sun and heat from the ground. 
Sidewalk means a hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
Sign means any device, including, but not limited to, the message or content of letters, words, numerals, figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination thereof, used for visual communication intended to attract the attention of the public or to publicize the subject thereof. A sign encompasses both the display area and the structure. 
Sign, A-frame, means a portable sign that is supported by a rigid, upright frame in the form of a triangle, the letter A, or an inverted V. 
Sign, animated, means a sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs using electronic ink, signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of sections that turn, and including any type of screen using animated, scrolling or fading displays, even if the message is stationary. 
Sign, changeable copy, means a sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods where such changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Also referred to as readerboards, stringerboards or posterboards. 
Sign, directional, means a sign that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of directional signs include, but are not limited to, "entrance," "exit," "no parking," "drive through," "loading zone," "stop," and other similar traffic related directives. 
Sign, double-faced, means a sign with two identical display areas back to back or with an interior angle between the signs of 60 degrees or less where each sign is designed to be seen from a different direction. 
Sign, freestanding, means any sign attached to a structure whose primary purpose is to support the sign and which is not itself an integral part of a building or other structure. Freestanding signs include ground signs and stanchion signs. 
Sign, ground, means a freestanding sign with a permanently affixed structural base or planter box, which base or box shall be of the same width as, or greater width than, the display area of the sign; the term excludes freestanding signs meeting the definition of a stanchion sign. Also referred to as a monument sign. 
Sign, illuminated—direct, means a sign that emits light from an internal source. Also referred to as an internally illuminated sign. 
Sign, illuminated—indirect, means a sign lighted by an external light source. Also referred to as an externally illuminated sign. 
Sign, LED, means any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses led technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDS), surface-mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDS), transmissive organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL) or any other similar technology. 
Sign, official, means a sign of a non-commercial nature erected in the public interest by or on the order of a government, including safety signs, traffic and street signs, commemorative signs and official or legal notices issued by any court, public agency or officer. 
Sign, portable, means any sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported periodically from place to place, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs posted on the roofs or truck beds of vehicles; and signs mounted or painted on vehicles that are parked or maintained at a location for the purpose of displaying a message visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business for purposes other than signage. 
Sign, projecting, means a sign attached and extending out from a building. Hanging signs are a form of projecting sign. 
Sign, roof. means a sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Sign, spectacular, means and includes beacons, balloons, streamers, and other attention-getting devices. 
Sign, stanchion, means a freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the display area is more than six feet above the ground and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the display area. 
Sign, standard informational, means a sign with an area of not greater than six square feet, with a sign face made for short-term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1½ inches. 
Sign, temporary, means a sign not intended or designed for permanent display. 
Sign, tri-vision, means a sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this chapter, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Sign, wall, means a sign attached to or affixed on a wall or building with the display surface parallel to the wall. Wall signs also include painted signs and signs on canopies and awnings. 
Sign, window, means any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window pane or glass, either inside or outside the building, and that is readable from the exterior of the structure. 
Site plan means a neat and approximate drawing of a multifamily residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development, showing the general layout of a proposed development including, among other features, the location of buildings, parking areas, and buffers and landscaping. The site plan is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a development in the case of a multiple-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development. 
Slope means degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two points on the ground separated by 500 feet or more. 
Slopes, steep, means lands with slopes of at least 35 percent, as indicated in the comprehensive plan of the city, or which can be calculated with aid of a United States Geological Survey 1:24,000, 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map or other available topographic information. 
Street, collector, means, unless otherwise defined by the major transportation plan or comprehensive plan, a collector street is a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal of greater classification. A collector also may provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
Street, local, means, unless otherwise defined in the major transportation plan or comprehensive plan, any public street, except an alley, collector, or arterial, and which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area only, usually a single land subdivision. 
Street, major arterial, means, unless otherwise defined by the major transportation plan or comprehensive plan, a major arterial street is a street connecting two or more towns or communities, connecting two highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. A major arterial may also serve a large traffic generator (such as an industrial area) and perform a secondary function of providing local access. 
Street, marginal access, means a residential street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through-traffic. 
Street, private, means a vehicular travel surface that has not been accepted for maintenance by the city and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
Street, public, means a vehicular travel surface within a public right-of-way accepted for public use by lawful procedure. The term "street" means "public street" unless otherwise specified. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Townhouse means a single-family dwelling, located on a lot, forming one of a group or series of two or more attached single-family dwellings separated from one another by walls, without doors, windows, or other provisions for human passage or visibility through such walls from basement to roof and having roofs which may extend from one such dwelling unit to another, and is part of a contiguous group of at least three, but not more than ten, such townhouses, and shall be considered a multifamily dwelling. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the strict requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Code; a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this chapter as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in practical difficulty; or a grant of relief from the strict requirements of this chapter due to a proposed project not being able to meet policies and objectives specifically identified in the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 2004, § 152.005; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013; Am. Ord. No. 458, 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. No. 468, 7-28-2014; Am. Ord. No. 479, 1-26-2015; Am. Ord. No. 488, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 1806, 5-24-2018) 
Sec. 108-4. - Mandatory housing ratios. 
For a city to be economically sound it must have diverse housing for residents and provide different forms of ownership such as fee simple and rentals. The city therefore has investigated the principles of urban planning and studied historical trends in the city and determined that the distribution of housing shall not exceed the following: multifamily-attached 15 percent. This shall be calculated based on the number of total dwellings. At no time shall the number of multifamily units exceed 15 percent of the total number of dwelling units. To maintain the prescribed ration, multifamily units can only be increased on a per dwelling basis with the construction of new single-family detached homes. However, all property zoned B-1 downtown commercial or identified in the city center plan as downtown center is exempted from the ration limitation on multifamily units. These provisions are intended to preserve the uniqueness of the city and to implement city comprehensive plan initiatives to plan for development. These provisions shall not apply to any property zoned for multifamily units prior to the date of ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 2004, § 152.015; Ord. No. 1715, 9-25-2017) 
Secs. 108-5—108-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 108-28. - District class and boundary provisions. 
(a)  Classes of districts. For the purpose of this chapter the city is hereby divided into the following classes of districts or zones: 

 
(b)  Rules governing district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any aforementioned districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are the centerlines of streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams, or such lines extended. Where district boundaries cut a block transversely or longitudinally, the line shall not cut through a lot, but shall coincide with the appropriate lot lines. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundary. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways, such district shall be as indicated on the zoning map, except as stated in subsection (b)(1) of this section. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale as shown on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-29. - Residential District (R-1A). 
(a)  Permitted uses. Within the R-1A Residential Districts the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  One single-family dwelling per lot, other than manufactured homes. 
(2)  Public and private parks and open space, but excluding commercial facilities. 
(3)  Public elementary and high schools, or private schools with a curriculum the same as ordinarily offered in public elementary and high schools, and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping. 
(4)  Churches, provided that: 
a.  They are located on a major collector street; 
b.  The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line; 
c.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines; 
d.  The building is used primarily for religious worship. 
(5)  Customary incidental home occupations provided as permitted in this article (See sections 108-201 through 108-214). 
(6)  Nursery schools or kindergartens, provided that there are at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area for each child and the play area is enclosed by a fence so as to adequately protect the children. 
(7)  Electrical transformers or gas regulator stations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located, provided that: 
a.  The structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line; 
b.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises; 
c.  The lot is suitably landscaped; 
d.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines. 
(8)  Railroad lines and passenger stations. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the R-1A district, the following accessory uses are permitted: 
(1)  The keeping of not more than two non-transient roomers or boarders by a resident family. 
(2)  Building or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use, including private garages and noncommercial greenhouses and workshops, provided they are located in the rear yard and not closer than 15 feet from side property line and 25 feet from rear property line. 
(3)  Private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, basketball courts and tennis courts. 
(4)  Principal use advertising signs, as regulated in sections 108-239 through 108-244. 
(5)  The raising of garden crops, vineyard crops, fruits or plants incidental to the residential use of the land. 
(6)  Buildings, including accessory buildings, may occupy no more than 50 percent of a lot. 
(7)  Accessory buildings cannot be attached to the main structure. 
(Code 2004, § 152.025; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-30. - Residential District (R-1B). 
(a)  Permitted uses. Within the R-1B Residential District the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: any use permitted in the R-1A Residential District. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the R-1B district, the following accessory uses are permitted: any accessory use permitted in the R-1A Residential District. 
(Code 2004, § 152.026; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-31. - Residential District (R-2). 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the R-2 district, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1B Residential District. 
(2)  Duplexes, one per lot. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the R-2 district, the following accessory uses are permitted: any accessory use permitted in the R-1A Residential District. 
(Code 2004, § 152.027; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-32. - Residential District (R-3). 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the R-3 district, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 Residential District. 
(2)  Apartment houses, provided that the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be five acres; 
b.  Density. There shall be no more than five apartments per gross acre; 
c.  Open space requirements; amenities. Not less than 25 percent of the gross acreage of the development shall be maintained as permanent open space. At least 50 percent of the required open space shall be accessible to residents. A minimum of ten percent of the required open space shall be improved as active recreational facilities with a maximum of 25 percent. Passive recreation, in compliance with adopted greenways and trails guidelines and plans, shall be provided. Parking and other paved surfaces, except patios and courtyards that are publicly accessible amenities, shall not count towards this open space requirement. All required amenities shall be installed before 50 percent of the overall development is completed; 
d.  Material and design standards. Apartments shall comply with the following material and design standards: 
1.  Exterior finishes shall be primarily horizontal wood or wood product siding, brick, stucco, stone or other decorative masonry product. Vinyl shall only be used in gables and/or soffits. 
2.  Facades of each apartment house shall not replicate the facade of immediately adjacent apartment houses. At least 20 percent of the facade shall be of another permitted material than the primary material. Roofing is not included in the facade. 
3.  Apartment houses shall utilize at least two of the following design features on the facade: 
(i)  Gables; 
(ii)  Recessed entries; 
(iii)  Covered front porches; 
(iv)  Pillars or posts; 
(v)  Bay window with a minimum of 24-inch projection; or 
(vi)  Dormers. 
4.  Walls which face a street other than an alley shall contain at least 20 percent of the wall space in windows and/or doors. 
e.  Application for approval. Applications for development shall be accompanied with the following: 
1.  A plat of the land to be included in the total development showing all rights-of-way and easements affecting the property. 
2.  The location of buildings and the number of stories contained in each. 
3.  Architectural drawings of the proposed apartment houses. 
4.  The preliminary location of water supply, sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
5.  The location of all curb cuts, driving lanes and parking areas. 
6.  The locations and type of all common areas (pedestrian walkways, open spaces, recreational uses) including a statement of the method to be used to ensure continued maintenance of such areas. 
7.  The location and height of all walls, fences and screen plantings. 
8.  A tabulation of the total area, number of apartments, and overall density per acre. 
(3)  Boardinghouses. 
(4)  Nursing care homes and hospitals. 
(5)  Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for profit, provided that: 
a.  They are located on a major or collector street; 
b.  The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line; 
c.  There is a planted buffer strip of ten feet wide at least along the side and rear lot lines. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the R-3 district, the following accessory uses are permitted: any accessory use permitted in the R-2 Residential District. 
(Code 2004, § 152.028; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 467, 7-28-2014) 
Sec. 108-33. - Townhouse Residential District (R-4). 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the R-4 district, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 Residential Districts. 
(2)  Townhouses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the R-4 district, the following accessory uses are permitted: any accessory use permitted in the R-1 Residential District. 
(c)  Intensity of use. In the R-4 district, the following minimum standards shall apply: 
(1)  There shall be no minimum lot size or lot width in the R-4 district. 
(2)  There shall be no maximum lot coverage in the R-4 district. 
(3)  There shall be no minimum lot frontage in the R-4 district. 
(4)  There shall be no more than eight dwelling units per gross acre. 
(d)  Building line setbacks. The minimum required setbacks for all buildings and structures from abutting street rights-of-way and side and rear property lines shall be as follows: 
(1)  The minimum front building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be 25 feet. When lots have double frontage, the required minimum setback shall be provided from both street rights-of-way. 
(2)  The minimum side building line setback from each side property line shall be ten feet. An exception is when zero lot lines are appropriate in attached dwelling units. 
(3)  The minimum rear building line setback from the rear property line shall be 25 feet. 
(e)  Height restrictions. The maximum height for a building or structure shall be 35 feet. 
(f)  Length restrictions. There shall be no continuous residential structures such as townhouses or attached dwellings containing more than five dwelling units. 
(g)  Distance between buildings. No structure or building shall be erected within 20 feet of any other structure. 
(h)  Parking requirements. All uses shall provide off-street parking as specified in section 108-275. 
(i)  Open space requirements; amenities. Not less than 25 percent of the gross acreage of the development shall be maintained as permanent open space. At least 50 percent of the required open space shall be accessible to residents. A minimum of ten percent of the required open space shall be improved as active recreational facilities with a maximum of 25 percent. Passive recreation, in compliance with adopted greenways and trails guidelines and plans, shall be provided. Parking and other paved surfaces, except patios and courtyards that are publicly accessible amenities, shall not count towards this open space requirement. All required amenities shall be installed before 50 percent of the overall development is completed. 
(j)  Material and design standards. Townhouses shall comply with the following material and design criteria: 
(1)  Exterior finishes shall be primarily horizontal wood or wood product siding, brick, stucco, stone or other decorative masonry product. Vinyl shall only be used in gables and/or soffits. 
(2)  Facades of each individual townhouse shall not replicate the facade of immediately adjacent townhomes. At least 20 percent of the facade shall be of another permitted material than the primary material. Roofing is not included in the facade. 
(3)  Individual townhomes shall utilize at least two of the following design features on the facade: 
a.  Gables; 
b.  Recessed entries; 
c.  Covered front porches; 
d.  Pillars or posts; 
e.  Bay window with a minimum of 24-inch projection; or 
f.  Dormers. 
(4)  Walls which face a street other than an alley shall contain at least 20 percent of the wall space in windows and/or doors. 
(k)  Application for approval. All applications for development or a change of zoning to an R-4 district shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A plat of the land to be included in the total development showing all rights-of-way and easements affecting the property to be rezoned to an R-4 classification. 
(2)  A plat of the lots and the boundaries thereof along with the square footage contained in each lot and the location and rights-of-way of proposed streets. 
(3)  The location of buildings and the number of stories contained in each. 
(4)  The preliminary location of water supply, sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
(5)  The location of all curb cuts, driving lanes and parking areas. 
(6)  The location and type of all common areas (pedestrian walkways, open spaces, recreational uses) including a statement of the method to be used to ensure continued maintenance of such areas. 
(7)  The location and height of all walls, fences and screen plantings. 
(8)  A tabulation of the total area, number of dwelling units, and overall density per acre. 
(9)  Architectural drawings of the proposed townhomes. 
(l)  Revision of plans after final approval. Any request to change an approval development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimension of streets, or similar changes, shall be approved by the city planning commission. A request for revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement of why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(m)  Compliance with subdivision regulations. The development shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 152.029; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 466, 7-28-2014) 
Sec. 108-34. - Professional District (P-1). 
Permitted uses. In the P-1 Professional District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R districts. 
(2)  Physicians, lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects and similar professional people who may occupy an entire building or group of buildings. Veterinarians are specifically excluded from the P-1 district. 
(3)  Businesses which are incidental to the above professional practices, such as pharmacies, optical sales and the like. 
(Code 2004, § 152.030; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-35. - Downtown Business District (B-1). 
Permitted uses. In the B-1 Downtown Business District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any retail business or service including the incidental production of products sold at retail on the premises, provided that the production area does not occupy more that 20 percent of the total floor area nor employ more than five persons. 
(2)  Professional offices. 
(3)  Hotels, offices and banks. 
(4)  Indoor theaters. 
(5)  Public uses and structures. 
(6)  Off-street parking lots and parking garages. 
(7)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(8)  Loft apartments. 
(Code 2004, § 152.031; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-36. - Local Business District (B-2). 
Permitted uses. In the B-2 Local Business District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any retail business or service customarily serving residential neighborhoods or oriented to the highways. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations, provided that all structures, including storage tanks, shall be placed not less than 30 feet from any property line. No storage tank shall be permitted above ground. Points of access and egress shall be located not less than 25 feet from the nearest intersecting street lines. Gasoline pumps must be located to side or back or property. 
(3)  Funeral homes. 
(4)  Bus terminals. 
(5)  Drive-in theaters. 
(6)  Automobile sales lots and repair garages. 
(Code 2004, § 152.032; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-37. - General Business District (B-3). 
Permitted uses. In the B-3 General Business District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the B-2 district. 
(2)  Any retail business or service customarily oriented to the highways. 
(Code 2004, § 152.033; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-38. - Industrial District (I-1). 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "light industry" shall be defined as a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging, where such manufacture takes place in a totally enclosed building. Uses that manufacture, distribute or warehouse for distribution nuclear materials or substantial quantities of hazardous materials shall not be classified as light industry. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In the I-1 Industrial District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Light industries, provided that they shall not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions. Industries shall be required to prove their conformity with such conditions. 
(2)  Any establishment which provides supplies and/or services primarily to commercial and industrial customers, such as janitorial services, sign shops, packaging or shipping service, locksmith or printing, lithographing, engraving, photocopying, blueprinting, publishing and binding establishments. 
(3)  Public utility structures/cell towers. 
(4)  Radio stations and transmission towers. 
(c)  Accessory uses. In the I-1 district, the following accessory uses are permitted: warehouses, truck terminals, and storage. 
(Code 2004, § 152.034; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-39. - Agricultural District (A-1). 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the A-1 Agricultural District, the following uses are permitted as a matter of right: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Forestry. 
(3)  Such uses incidental to agriculture and forestry and necessary for their maintenance. 
(4)  Public utility structures and community facilities. 
(5)  Farming and such uses as relate to farming such as the storing, boarding, and raising of animals and other livestock. 
(6)  Structures for horses, cows, or other livestock shall not be located closer than 100 feet of any property line. 
(7)  No more than one horse, cow, or other type of livestock shall be kept per acre of land. 
(b)  Accessory uses. In the A-1 Agricultural District, the following accessory uses are permitted: 
(1)  The keeping of not more than two non-transient roomers or boarders by a resident family. 
(2)  Buildings or structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use, including private garages and noncommercial greenhouses and workshops, provided they are located in the rear yard and not closer than five feet to any lot line. 
(3)  Private recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, basketball courts, and tennis courts. 
(4)  Principal use advertising signs, as regulated in sections 108-239 through 108-244. 
(Code 2004, § 152.035; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-40. - Planned Unit Development District (PUD). 
(a)  Permitted uses. The PUD Planned Unit Development District is established to permit greater flexibility and more creative and imaginative design for the development of residential, commercial and industrial areas than may be possible in the other zoning districts created in this article. The PUD district is intended to promote a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of amenities and preservation of natural qualities of open spaces. Within the PUD district, a variety of housing types and land uses may be permitted in an orderly relationship to one another and to existing land uses, as well as with due regard to comprehensive planning within the city. The PUD district may be permitted only in areas where public water and sewer are available. 
(b)  Approval. All lot and structure requirements in the PUD district, unless otherwise noted, shall be subject to the city council's approval; however, the minimum lot size shall be no smaller than 9,000 square feet. The city council may approve exceptions to the minimum lot area and frontage for corner lots which do not access off the arterial street, but access off a collector street. Listed below are other district requirements: 
(1)  Open space shall be required for all land development and infill proposals occurring on five or more acres of land. No less than 20 percent of the total acreage of the site shall be set aside as permanent open space in accordance with the mandatory legal provisions that are set forth in this section. Up to 25 percent of open space requirement may utilize land needed for drainage and retention. However, remaining open space shall not use more natural area. 
(2)  All streets shall have sidewalks that are no less than five feet in width installed on both sides and be ADA compliant, and have a landscaping strip between the sidewalk and curb. Within the required sidewalk landscaping strip, the land developer or the landowner shall install pedestrian lighting fixtures at intervals of 50 feet, on center. Such pedestrian lighting fixtures shall be 14 feet in height, coated in black paint and shall be approved by the community development director. 
(3)  All land development and infill proposals occurring on five or more acres of land shall establish a property owners' association. Membership within the property owners' association shall be mandatory for all landowners and their successors in interest. The documents establishing the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county, and shall also be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. The mandatory property owners association, at a minimum, shall be responsible for the maintenance of common areas and open space as follows. 
(c)  Additional requirements for planned unit development (PUD) districts. The following provisions shall apply to the PUD district: 
(1)  Preapplication conference. Before submitting an application for a PUD district, the applicant shall confer with the community development director obtain information and guidance before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys or other data. 
(2)  Application. An applicant desiring to establish a PUD district shall provide, upon request, two copies of a master development plan, indicating the following: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and the person or entity that prepared the concept plan/special area plan; 
b.  Boundaries of the entire property, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
c.  Current zoning; 
d.  Total area of the property in acres; 
e.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics; 
f.  Vicinity map; 
g.  Banks of streams, lakes and other water bodies; 
h.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by FEMA, United States Geological Survey, or the city; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands, as defined by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
i.  Location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction; 
j.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
k.  Property development density and lot sizes for each dwelling unit type; 
l.  Designation of minimum lot areas and yards; 
m.  Location and amount of development, by type of use; 
n.  Building use, location, square footage, density and building height for all parcels of land; 
o.  Off-street parking and loading space areas, points of access to the public rights-of-way and motor vehicular circulation patterns within the subject property; 
p.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas; 
q.  Indication that the property is served by public water and sewer or private and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more; 
r.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
s.  Location and width of required transitional buffers at external site boundaries; 
t.  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site or adjacent to the site; 
u.  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities; 
v.  Public rights-of-way, any required or proposed improvements to the public rights-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the right-of-way; 
w.  Width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets and sidewalks. In addition, a landscaping plan including a tree survey indicating caliper size of existing canopy; 
x.  A landscaping plan including a tree survey indicating caliper size of existing canopy. Pines shall be omitted; and 
y.  Seal and signature of the professional person preparing the plan. 
(Code 2004, § 152.036; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 395, 5-21-2007; Am. Ord. No. 1714, 9-25-2017) 
Sec. 108-41. - Downtown Commercial Overlay District. 
(a)  Function. The function of the overlay district is to increase the uses of properties within the boundary by extending additional uses if the requirements herein are met. All uses of the underlying zone are permitted unless this section prohibits them. This overlay shall come into effect on any new development, addition or modification that involves at least 25 percent of the total square footage of the exterior walls. Improvements less than 25 percent may apply for a code compliance certificate (CCC) as well. For infrastructure or other improvements if the cost equals 25 percent of the assessed value by the county tax assessor's office, then a code compliance certificate (CCC) is required. The city reserves the right to waive any requirements of the underlying zone as a part of this overlay for conformity purposes as a part of the CCC process. 
(b)  Process. 
(1)  Improve the quality of life for area residents through the economic benefits that support a healthy and sustainable economy, which include improved community services and amenities, new jobs and business opportunities, stable property values, strong diversified local economies, a balanced mix of uses, and appealing storefronts and public spaces. 
(2)  Maintain and create a vital historic downtown and neighborhoods that accommodate present-day lifestyles while remaining strongly grounded in their cultural heritage. 
(3)  Develop and nurture a successful and sustainable local tourism industry by incorporating the principles established by The National Trust for Historic Preservation, which focus on quality and authenticity; preserve and protect resources; make sites and programs come alive; find the appropriate fit between community and tourist needs; and collaborate with partners. 
(4)  Protect, share, and enhance locally or regionally significant cultural, historic and natural resources that may include places, artifacts, landscapes, architecture, ecological systems, archeological sites, indigenous and emerging communities, products including arts and crafts, folklore, events, lifestyles, and traditions that authentically represent the culture and heritage of past and present communities. 
(5)  Manage the impacts of tourism on local infrastructure by planning for and providing adequate parking, transportation routes, accommodations, services, amenities and public open spaces. 
(6)  Ensure that historic character and quality is protected and enhanced by requiring that both modified historic structures and new development are compatible with the community's character. 
(7)  Ensure that compatibility exists between new construction and existing historic buildings. 
(8)  Create a unified development plan for corridors of both commercial and residential usage. 
(9)  To improve and upgrade infrastructure and provide services to potential new commercial businesses located within the city. 
(10)  To promote unemployment rates decreasing for city residents. 
(11)  To assist in preserving the small town character of the city as an asset in attracting commercial and residential development which fits the character of the city and increase the population base to attract commercial development. 
(12)  To assist in continuing commercial development and incorporate building and site design guidelines. To promote pedestrian features from the downtown center character area. To preserve historic residential structures for office and neighborhood retail. 
(c)  Boundaries. The location and boundaries of the Harlem Commercial Overlay District are established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Harlem," as amended. This map is a visual representation of the district and may not be precise; the city maintains a list of all parcels within the district for inspection. The district shall extend a minimum of 300 from the centerline of Louisville Street and Milledgeville Road in each direction unless it terminates on a property line boundary. 

(d)  General regulations. 
(1)  Land use. All uses shall comply with the minimum regulations of the underlying zoning district. All uses permitted in the underlying district, including uses permitted subject to use permits, are similarly permitted in the Harlem Commercial Overlay District, except as provided herein. Where the regulations for the overlay district differ from those of the underlying zoning the more restrictive regulations shall apply except for those that have an underlying residential zone. In the granting of use permits the decision-making body must find that the proposed use is compatible with the overall intent of the overlay district. 

(2)  Review procedure and criteria. Development proposals shall be evaluated by the community development director with the overall intent of the following Harlem Commercial Overlay District objectives with the major components of the CCC review being buildings, sidewalks, landscaping and lighting: 
a.  Encouraging the optimum development of land along Milledgeville Road and Louisville Street in the city, thus promoting the development of a commercial center, with a downtown area and transitional areas. 
b.  All buildings, whether public or private or non-profit, within the district shall be subject to a CCC review, prior to any exterior site demolition or construction or building facade additions, improvements, or renovations and prior to application for any building permit for such activities. The purpose of a CCC is to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this section. A CCC application shall include a site plan, building floor plans, sidewalk plan, landscape plan, lighting plan, and elevations, drawn to scale, and shall be approved by the community development director or his designee. 
c.  As a part of the CCC, open space development and maintenance agreements, paving in parking areas other than asphalt and concrete, reduction of parking requirements, off-site parking, shared parking, angled on-street parking, curb cuts, new streets, sidewalk area improvements including special or decorative paving and plantings and street furniture location and type shall be reviewed and the addition of street lights as specified by the city. 
d.  When an existing building that is more than 50 years old is being renovated, and where such building is not within a local historic district, architectural drawings of the proposed renovation and details of the subject architectural feature must be provided to the city. 
e.  For property with an underlying zoning classification of residential and under the 25 percent improvement criteria this overlay may still be applied for. However, without obtaining a CCC the only permitted uses for residentially zoned property shall be for small site retail and service near dense residential neighborhoods. Some uses which are not retail or service in nature may also be allowed so that a variety of uses may locate in existing buildings to promote historic preservation. Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented. These uses are only permissible subject to basic review by the community development director. 
f.  Every effort shall be made to preserve existing mature trees with a height greater than 50 feet and a trunk caliper greater than ten inches at four feet above grade. For the purposes of protecting an existing mature shade tree, an applicant may request an administrative variation from regulations, subject to CCC requirements and conditioned to a site plan which demonstrates that provisions shall be made to implement an alternate design which meets the intent of this overlay. 
g.  A CCC applicant shall receive a response from the city within 15 days of the date that a completed application is submitted. The application fee shall be in accordance with the city's fee schedule then in effect. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses: 
a.  Retail commercial; 
b.  Banks; 
c.  Restaurants; 
d.  Professional services; 
e.  Underlying zone uses; 
f.  Eating establishments; 
g.  Bed and breakfasts; 
h.  Loft apartments, townhomes, condos; and 
i.  Funeral homes. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following are prohibited uses: 
a.  Exterior and outside storage; 
b.  Communication towers; 
c.  Liquor package stores; 
d.  Adult entertainment; or 
e.  Manufacturing. 
(5)  Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses and require approval within the CCC: 
a.  Auction houses; 
b.  Hotels and motels; 
c.  Businesses associated with agriculture; 
d.  Auto repair shops and auto sales; 
e.  Drive-through facilities; 
f.  Mini-warehouses; 
g.  Roadside stands and produce markets; 
h.  Fuel stations; 
i.  Home business uses; 
j.  Brewery and micro pubs; 
k.  Health related services; or 
l.  Tattoo parlors. 
(6)  Landscape requirements. 
a.  All landscape requirements shall be subject to a CCC. 
b.  Historic lighting should be used throughout the project along roads. The lights shall be evenly spaced. The city has a preferred specification for lights: Washington postlite LED acrylic acorn style. The streetlight shall be cast aluminum finial and prismatic glass reflector, mounted on a 14-foot, four-inch diameter fluted post. Fixture and post to be black finish. 

c.  Tree and plant selection. The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree board. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in subsection (d)(6)c.1—3 of this section, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
1.  Small trees. Apricot, Bradford pear, crabapple, flowering peach, golden rain tree, hawthorn, Japanese lilac tree, purpleleaf plum, redbud, serviceberry, soapberry. 
2.  Medium trees. Basswood, English oak, green ash, hackberry, honey locust (thornless), Japanese pagoda tree, linden, Osage orange (male, thornless), pecan, persimmon, red mulberry fruitless, male, red oak, river birch, sassafras, white poplar. 
3.  Large trees. Bur oak, cottonwood (cottonless, male), Kentucky coffee tree, London sycamore, silver maple, sugar maple, sycamore. 
(7)  Buffers. 
a.  Required landscape strips. No lot shall hereafter be developed with less than the minimum required landscape strip for the specific use as shown in section 108-68, table IV, when abutting a public or private street. 
b.  Landscape strip design standards. Landscape strips shall be planted with trees, shrubs, grass, or groundcover, except for those areas that are mulched. Landscaping shall be planted throughout and shall not appear as a single row of plantings. Landscape strips shall not contain structures, accessory uses, parking of any kind, stormwater detention facilities, fences of any kind, patios, or displays of commercial stock. Berms and retaining walls as part of an overall landscaping plan, signs as permitted in this article, driveways required to access the property, pedestrian-oriented facilities, and underground utilities are permitted within the landscape strip. 
c.  Waiver of landscape strip requirements. The front landscape strips required by this section may be waived for lots which abut one or more developed properties on the same side of the street and which contain a structure that is setback less than ten feet from the right-of-way. 
d.  Required buffers. No lot shall hereafter be developed with less than the minimum required buffer along a side or rear property line when abutting property containing a single-family dwelling or manufactured home, for the specific use as shown in table IV. 

e.  Buffer specifications. Any buffer required by this section shall be natural vegetation, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings, and replanted where sparsely vegetated, with evergreen trees and/or shrubs to form an opaque screen that will provide a visual buffer throughout all seasons. Buffers shall be designed to provide privacy and security and to give adequate protection to adjacent neighbors from lights, sounds, and other potential nuisances. Buffers shall be planted with landscaping throughout and shall not appear as a single row of plantings. The length of any required buffers shall not extend closer than 15 feet to any public right-of-way in order to preserve vision clearance. 
f.  Structural buffer design standards. When commercial construction abuts residential property, a minimum six-foot tall wooden slat fence must be installed. Fences and walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property and shall be located in such a manner to preserve existing vegetation. 
g.  Reduction of buffer. A required buffer may be reduced by as much as 30 percent through the site plan review process for multifamily, institutional, residential living facilities, places of worship, schools, daycare centers, and other institutional uses if screening is provided by installing a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence or masonry wall within the required buffer. 

h.  Sign requirements. Signs shall comply with section 108-241. In addition, monument signs shall be preferred on Milledgeville Road composed of a brick foundation or frame and an approved material for the face of the sign. 
(8)  Sidewalk area and street requirements. 

a.  Any paving, including concrete, special or decorative paving, within the sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, or sidewalk supplemental zone shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
b.  Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets are prohibited. 
c.  A sidewalk area shall be located along all streets and shall consist of a sidewalk landscape zone with street trees, an unobstructed sidewalk clear zone, and a supplemental zone. The city may issue a supplemental encroachment permit for businesses to use area within if it keeps with the downtown atmosphere and is pedestrian friendly. 

d.  Street trees are required. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 50 feet on center and spaced an equal distance between streetlights and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of 3½ inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Trees planted in front of storefront treatments shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten feet and have a minimum mature height of 50 feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of 40 square feet. 
e.  All street furniture and pavers, where installed, and all street trees shall have a location and type subject to approval by the city, including, but not limited to, the following: benches, waste receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, tree grates, and streetlights. Tree grates shall be a minimum of eight feet by five feet. Decorative street lights shall be placed a maximum of 50 feet on center and shall be spaced an equal distance. 

f.  Sidewalk specifications shall be as follows: All sidewalks shall be at least six feet wide and four inches thick, except where automobile driveways cross the same, in which case the sidewalks shall be at least six inches in thickness for residential driveways and at least eight inches in thickness for commercial driveways for that portion used as the driveway; that part of the driveway extending from the curb to the sidewalk shall also be at least six inches in thickness for residential driveways and eight inches in thickness for commercial driveways. In the downtown area, the use of brick pavers may be required for conformity with existing designs. All ADA requirements shall be observed. 

Sidewalk paving material continues across intervening driveways
Sidewalk paving material continue across intervening driveways. 
(9)  Building requirements. 
a.  Along the street facade of all new and renovated buildings and structures the following shall apply: 
1.  Where an individual use has a street facade on more than one street, such entrance requirement shall apply along a storefront street, or when on other streets, such requirement shall apply along the higher order of streets in the order of arterial, collector or local street. Where both streets are the same order, entrance orientation may be to either street. Where an historic structure is being renovated, such entrance locations may reflect those of such historic structure. Under this section, any addition or expansion that is 25 percent or less does not fall under the definition of the term "new structures." The front facade of the building shall be as close to the sidewalk supplemental zone as possible unless the building has a residential facade. 
2.  All main buildings or primary structures shall be designed by an architect registered in the state. 
3.  All commercial, industrial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings, shall be constructed of brick, stucco or textured masonry block. The exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall not be used on the exterior of commercial, industrial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings. Any addition or expansion that is 25 percent or less to an existing building, can be of material that is of the same grade currently on the existing facade. Only one such exception for a building expansion of 25 percent shall be permitted per year. The community development director may issue permits for expansion of 25 percent or less to an existing building. 
4.  Awnings shall be of fabrics, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. 

5.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited on exteriors facing the street. All building stories with the exception of storefront treatment shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the total facade area with each story being calculated independently. 

6.  All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than the width, including display windows but not transoms. 
7.  Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed, with the exception of transoms, which may be prism glass. 
8.  Entry facade window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of one-quarter inch from the exterior wall. 
9.  Doors and windows that operate as horizontal sliders are prohibited except where renovating an historic building with this window type. 
10.  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two inches from the exterior facade. 
11.  Stoops and entry-level porches shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass. 

12.  Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of eight inches. 
13.  Residential porches shall be covered and have a minimum depth of five feet, a minimum length of six feet and a minimum area of 40 feet. 
14.  Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. 
15.  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 
16.  The minimum building height as measured along the build-to line shall be 18 feet. 
17.  All buildings shall have street facades with continuous storefront treatment or residential treatment. 
18.  The proposed design for all commercial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings, shall be submitted for review and approval to the community development director and the design shall comply with the applicable building regulations and design guidelines as adopted by the city council. 
(10)  Yard, height, area and density requirements. 
a.  All development must conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning classification. 
b.  Parking lots in front of buildings shall be prohibited. Side parking shall be permissible in certain areas of the district. 
c.  Setbacks shall not be required for new non-residential building construction. 
d.  Street access to motorized golf carts shall be preferred when appropriate. 
(11)  Parcels located in city historic districts. 
a.  Property located within a local historic district shall obtain a CCC if required within this section prior to making an application with the historic preservation commission for a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  Pertaining to building material requirements as set forth by an approved COA, the community development director hall revise the CCC if necessary for compliance for historic preservation recommendations. 
(e)  Administration. 
(1)  Appeals. 
a.  Any person who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the community development director and/or interpretation of this article, may file an appeal with the city manager stating the grounds for such appeal. 
b.  The planning commission is hereby authorized to hear and be the final arbitrator of appeals of the community development director findings. 
c.  An appeal from a ruling of the community development director shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. The commission may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings of the city manager. In cases where an appeal is granted, the commission shall have all necessary powers of the community development director and may issue building permits and land use permits, or direct the issuance of building permits and land use permits not otherwise inconsistent with this article and any other code, resolution, or ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Waiver of requirements. The city reserves the right to waive any or all of these requirements in situations where an emergency or act of nature has occurred and triggered the enforcement of this article. 
(3)  Modifications. It is understood that every development is unique and that the spirit of this land use section is to enhance the commercial corridor of the city. In cases where the enforcement of this section creates unsatisfactory results or lessens the quality of the project, minor modifications of the regulations herein may be issued by the community development director. 
(Code 2004, § 152.037; Ord. No. 1707, 6-27-2017) 
Sec. 108-42. - Conservation Preservation Residential Zone (CP-R Zone). 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the CP-R zone is: 
(1)  To provide for the preservation of open space as a nonstructural stormwater control and watershed protection measure; 
(2)  To provide a residential zoning district that promotes environmentally sensitive uses of the land; 
(3)  To encourage preservation of unique or sensitive natural resources such as waterways, wetlands, groundwater, floodplains, and wildlife habitat; 
(4)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development; 
(5)  To conserve scenic views; 
(6)  To exclude uses capable of negatively impacting the environment; 
(7)  To limit the intensity of uses that will detract from the traditional scale and scenic quality of the district; and 
(8)  To provide a residential density of approximately one dwelling unit per two acres. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In the CP-R zone, the following uses only are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this article: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures, including private garages to accommodate not more than four cars; provided additional garage or implement shelters may be erected, maintained and used on sites of five acres or more, and provided that such structures shall not occupy any required yard space; 
(3)  Private green houses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines, and other horticultural stock; 
(4)  Agricultural crops, excluding commercial grown crops; 
(5)  Stands for the display of agricultural products raised on the premises shall generally conform to the provisions set forth in section 108-114. Any applicable state license in addition to city occupational tax certificate shall be required; 
(6)  Privately owned open space and associated passive recreational facilities and structures; 
(7)  The following animals, under the following conditions: horse, provided: 
a.  No horses shall be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than two acres; 
b.  No more than one horse per acre shall be maintained; 
c.  All horses shall be for personal use only; and 
d.  No stall or barn shall be kept or maintained within 200 feet of any window or door of any neighboring building used for human habitation nor within 300 feet of any portion of a required yard space or adjoining property if such property is devoted to a use other than agriculture and shall observe a setback of at least 50 feet from the property line; 
(8)  Day nurseries where daycare is provided for not more than six children and said nursery is duly licensed; 
(9)  Home occupations: home barber and beauty parlors and professional use including internet businesses; 
(10)  The following signs: 
a.  One unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area with a maximum of four feet per side composed of wood or faux wood may be displayed; or 
b.  Signs identifying persons engaged in construction on a site shall be permitted as long as construction is in progress. 
(c)  Conditional permitted uses. In the CP-P zone, the following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 108-45 and if additional conditions, which may be required by the city council, are met: 
(1)  Farms for the growing of commercial agricultural products; 
(2)  Public utility lines, fire, or water tower, utility sub-station; or 
(3)  Public dock or boathouse. 
(d)  Height. No building in the CP-R zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(e)  Front yard. Every lot in a CP-R zone shall have a front yard which has a depth not less than 35 feet. 
(f)  Side yards. In the CP-R zone every lot shall have side yards as follows: 
(1)  Lots shall have a side yard on each side of the main building which side yard has a width not less than 20 feet. 
(2)  Corner lots shall have the following side yards: 
a.  On the side which adjoins another lot, the side yard shall be the same as that required on any lot. 
b.  On the side street the width of the required side yard shall be the same as the front yard requirement (35 feet). 
(g)  Placement of buildings. Placement of buildings on any lot shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Lots. 
a.  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
b.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from any side lot line the equivalent of the required side yard on such lot and from the rear property line a distance of 20 percent of the depth of the lot, not to exceed 50 feet. 
c.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
d.  A non-dwelling accessory building may build to the rear lot line of the required side yard, provided if the lot rears upon an alley such accessory building shall maintain a distance of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line and may build to within 20 feet of the side lot line. 
(2)  Corner lots. 
a.  No building shall occupy any portion of a required yard. 
b.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be a distance of 20 feet. 
c.  Any building, any portion of which is used for human habitation, shall observe a distance from the rear property line of 20 feet. 
d.  On corner lots, an accessory building may build to the rear lot line not less than ten feet from the rear line of such lot. 
(h)  Area. The minimum required area of a lot in the CP-R zone shall not be less than two acres, or 87,120 square feet. 
(i)  Lot area per dwelling. The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than the minimum required lot area. 
(j)  Lot width. In the CP-R zone, every lot created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall maintain a width of not less than 100 feet at the rear line of the required front yard. 
(k)  Permissible lot coverage. All buildings including accessory buildings and structures shall not cover more than 15 percent of the area of the lot. 
(l)  Off-street parking requirements. Shall be in accordance with section 108-275. 
(m)  Riparian buffer requirement. All conservation subdivisions within this district shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained along both banks of streams and along all impoundments, as measured from the top of the bank of the width of at least 75 feet, and a minimum width of 50 feet. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the buffer unless a variance is granted in accordance with city codes. 
(2)  A minimum setback of 200 feet must be maintained for individual sewage disposal systems on lots adjacent to streams and wetlands as defined above and be permitted by the health department. 
(n)  Site analysis map requirement. Concurrent with the submission of a site sketch plan, as outlined in the city subdivision regulations, codified as chapter 114, a site analysis map shall be submitted. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design. The preliminary site analysis map shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than two-foot intervals; 
(4)  General site hydrology; 
(5)  Tree survey including all trees with a diameter at breast height of six inches; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  Existing roads and structures; 
(8)  Riparian buffers; and 
(9)  Critical habitat, archeological and historical sites. 
(o)  Single-family residential standards. All single-family residences must meet the following standards in the CP-R district: 
(1)  All structures including the primary structure and accessory structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof having a pitch of three in 12 or greater. 
(2)  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, metal roofing, or tile materials. Plastic panels are prohibited unless a part of a solar panel. 
(3)  The exterior wall shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or plastic panels. 
(4)  The minimum horizontal dimension of the structure shall be 24 feet. 
(5)  The minimum floor area shall be 1,600 square feet. 
(6)  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, piling or post construction which complies with the city building code. 
(7)  All structures must meet wind loading requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the ICC-IBC and IRC codes. 
(Code 2004, § 152.038; Ord. No. 1708, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 108-43. - Sustainable Community Mixed Use District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Sustainable Community Mixed Use District (MUD) is to advocate the creation and preservation of a distinct and visually harmonious community of choice that is compact, mixed-use and pedestrian friendly; and supports patterns of urbanization that are stimulating, safe and ecologically sustainable. It is further the purpose of this district to introduce urban planning techniques that will repair and transform the auto centric patterns of suburbia that produced unimaginative housing subdivisions, big box stores and a proliferation of parking areas into a complete community that is sustainable and more than capable of accommodating a diversity of income levels, building types, modes of transportation and open space. To this end, and as expressed in the comprehensive land use plan, this district seeks to enable, encourage and implement land development patterns that will purposefully integrate dwellings with open space, offices, schools and stores, resulting in the manifestation of a distinct and visually harmonious community of choice that is wholesome, sustainable and healthy. 
(b)  Intent. The intent of this district is to create and to preserve a visually harmonious and orderly community that is compact, mixed-use and pedestrian friendly wherein: 
(1)  An interconnected network of streets disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips, while encouraging walking and bicycling as healthy and sustainable forms of transportation and recreation; 
(2)  A diversity of uses enables a variety of economic, recreational, retail and residential activity; 
(3)  The ordinary activities of daily living occurs within walking and bicycling distance of most dwellings, allowing independence to those who do not drive, while expanding the transportation options that are available to those who do drive; 
(4)  A range of housing types and price levels accommodate diverse ages and incomes; 
(5)  A range of open spaces accommodate various community recreational purposes; and 
(6)  Architecture and landscape designs grown from local topography, history, climate and building technique. 
(7)  This district is envisioned for usage within parcels that have a nexus with a state highway or other commercial corridor. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Frontage line means a property line bordering either a street or an open space. The exterior walls of a building facing a frontage line defines the public realm, and is therefore more regulated than the exterior walls facing other property lines. 
Frontage line, principal, means the property line that is designated to bear the measure of the minimum lot width. 
Frontage line, secondary, means the property line that is not designated as the principal frontage line. 
Main open space means the primary outdoor gathering place for a community. 
Mixed-use building means a building that provides a vertical mix of uses, with the first floor supplied with nonresidential uses and the upper floor occupied with residential uses. 
Residential uses mean apartments or for sale as condominiums, townhomes and detached single-family homes or duplexes. 
(d)  Streetscape standards. 
(1)  General. 
a.  All streets are intended for comingled use by vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic, and to provide access to lots and open space. 
b.  All streets shall intersect with, or terminate at, other streets in order to form a network. Cul-de-sacs shall only be permitted to accommodate natural environmental conditions that are specific to the site such as: 
1.  A protected habitat; 
2.  A protected wetland; 
3.  A riparian corridor; or 
4.  Surface waterbodies. 
c.  Sidewalk width. 
1.  All streets shall have sidewalks that are no less than five feet in width installed on both sides and be ADA compliant. 
2.  In no such case shall any sidewalk be greater than 25 feet in width, unless approved by the community development director. 
d.  Sidewalk landscaping strip. 
1.  All streets shall have a sidewalk landscaping strip that is no less than four feet in width between the travel lane and the sidewalk. 
2.  Stamped concrete shall be prohibited along all streets. 
(2)  Specific to arterial and collector streets. 
a.  The posted vehicle speed for all new arterial streets shall not exceed 35 miles per hour. Collector streets shall be 30 miles per hour. 
b.  Bicycles are a sustainable and viable mode of transportation and recreation in the city. In furtherance of promoting bicycling as a sustainable and viable mode of transportation in the city, arterial streets with sufficient paving width to accommodate safe movement of bicyclists shall provide dedicated bicycle lanes that will satisfy the following: 
1.  All such dedicated bicycle lanes shall be separated from vehicular travel and/or parking lanes by striped pavement markings which function as a buffer; and 
2.  All such dedicated bicycle lanes shall be no less than five feet in width. 
c.  Within the required sidewalk landscaping strip, the land developer or the landowner shall install pedestrian lighting fixtures at intervals of 50 feet, on center. Such pedestrian lighting fixtures shall be 14 feet in height, coated in black paint and shall be approved by the community development director. 
d.  Within the required sidewalk landscaping strip, the introduced species of street trees shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Red oaks; 
2.  Bur oaks; 
3.  Southern sugar maple; 
4.  Green ash; or 
5.  Or additional species if approved by the community development director or his designee. 
e.  All street trees shall be planted on center within the required sidewalk landscaping strip, and equidistant (25 feet) between pedestrian lighting fixtures unless smaller trees are approved and given additional specifications. All street trees shall have a caliper no less than two inches at the time of planting, and shall be warranted by the land developer or the landowner for at least two years. 
(3)  Specific to alleys. 
a.  All alleys shall be private. An easement shall also be provided, and recorded within the deed covenants/restrictions that will allow access for emergency personnel, public safety personnel, public works personnel, et cetera. 
b.  All alleys shall provide continuous access between two streets. 
c.  All alleys shall be internal to the land development or infill proposal. 
d.  All alleys shall be constructed, and paved with surface materials that are similar to the surface materials used to pave all streets. 
(4)  Specific to multi-purpose trails. Multi-purpose trails shall be provided to connect open space with the built environment. 
a.  With the exception of golf carts, the use of motorized vehicles shall be prohibited. 
b.  Multi-purpose trails shall require an easement of no less than 30 feet in width. 
c.  The maximum grade of multi-purpose trails shall be six percent. 
d.  Multi-purpose trails shall require a pavement width of ten feet. 
e.  Shoulders having a minimum width of five feet, and either mulched or planted with grass, shall be provided on both sides of the multi-purpose trail. 
(e)  Lot dimensions and building height standards. 
(1)  Unless specified otherwise in this section, each newly platted lot shall front at least one street. The portion of each newly platted lot fronting a street, unless specified otherwise in this section, shall be designated as its principal frontage line. 
a.  For a newly platted lot sharing a property line with more than one street, one property line shall be designated as its principal frontage line, and the other property lines shall be designated as secondary frontage lines. Principal selection shall be determined based on surrounding neighborhood but may be altered based on existing topography or lot dimension. 
b.  For all newly platted lots, the principal pedestrian entrance shall be on a principal frontage line. 
(2)  Each newly platted lot shall be dimensioned according to table 1-A and table 1-B. 
TABLE 1-A. RESIDENTIAL LOT DIMENSIONS 

 
TABLE 1-B. NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE LOT DIMENSIONS 

 
(3)  The height for all buildings shall be in accordance with table 2. The following shall also apply: In no such case shall any building that exceeds 35 feet in height be within 75 feet of any building that is 35 feet in height or less. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of any building proposed to exceed 35 feet in height or less. 
TABLE 2. BUILDING HEIGHT 

 
(f)  Principal uses. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Principal uses shall be governed by the text approved by council. 
b.  The residential density shall not exceed three dwellings per gross acre. Density bonuses shall be awarded based in accordance with the provisions at the end of this chapter. 
c.  The nonresidential density shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross leasable floor per acre calculated based on total project size. 
d.  Open space shall be required for all land development and infill proposals occurring on five or more acres of land. No less than 20 percent of the total acreage of the site shall be set aside as permanent open space in accordance with the mandatory legal provisions that are set forth in this section. Up to 25 percent of open space requirement may utilize land needed for drainage and retention. However, remaining open space shall not use more natural area. 
e.  Unless otherwise specified in this section, all permitted principal uses shall be conducted within enclosed buildings. 
(2)  Specific to detached single-family dwellings. Unless specified otherwise in this section, the minimum finished floor area for a detached single-family dwelling shall be at least 1,400 square feet heated and cooled. 
(3)  Specific to townhouse dwellings. 
a.  The minimum finished floor area for each townhouse dwelling shall satisfy the following: 
1.  Two bedrooms: 1,000 square feet; 
2.  Three bedrooms: 1,150 square feet; and 
3.  Four bedrooms: 1,200 square feet. 
b.  Each townhouse dwelling shall be properly equipped with a sprinkler system to be approved by the county fire marshal, and shall also be pre-wired for fire detection and an alarm system. 
(4)  Specific to multifamily dwellings. 
a.  The minimum finished floor area for each multifamily dwelling shall satisfy the following: 
1.  One bedroom: 850 square feet; 
2.  Two bedrooms: 1,000 square feet; 
3.  Three bedrooms: 1,150 square feet; and 
4.  Four bedrooms: 1,200 square feet. 
b.  Each multifamily dwelling shall be properly equipped with a sprinkler system to be approved by the county fire marshal, and shall also be pre-wired for a security system. 
c.  Stairways shall be internal to all multifamily buildings. 
(5)  Specific to nonresidential uses. 
a.  Each nonresidential use shall have no less than 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area. 
b.  Stairways shall be internal to all nonresidential buildings. 
(6)  Specific to mixed-use buildings. 
a.  Density calculations. 
1.  The residential density for mixed-use buildings shall be expressed in terms of dwellings per gross acre, and the nonresidential density for mixed-use buildings shall be expressed in terms of gross leasable floor area per net acre. The density for all residential uses shall not exceed three dwellings per gross acre plus any bonuses; and the density for all nonresidential uses shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area per gross acre. 
2.  All residential uses shall be considered as equivalent to multifamily dwellings. 
b.  Prohibitions. 
1.  With the exception of pedestrian entrances and lobbies to residential uses only, in no case shall any residential uses be permitted on the first floor. 
2.  The integration of residential and nonresidential uses on the same floor, within the same building, shall be prohibited. 
c.  Additional standards and limitations. 
1.  Uses shall be mixed such that at no time will residential uses be located below nonresidential uses. 
2.  Stairways shall be internal to all mixed-use buildings. 
(7)  Specific to open space. 
a.  The permitted uses of open space shall be limited to the following only: 
1.  Natural area. A natural area is a type of open space that is exposed to the open sky, and is made available for learning purposes and unstructured recreation. A natural area shall consist of natural environmental conditions to include, but shall not be limited to, lakes, meadows, ponds, natural rock outcroppings, reservoirs, riparian corridors, steep slopes, wildlife ecosystems, woodlands and all other similar natural characteristics and natural features. Natural areas may be independent of streets and buildings, and are encouraged to follow the lineal and natural trajectories of riparian corridors, wildlife corridors and woodlands. All natural areas shall be naturalistically disposed. Open shelters may be provided only if constructed from any combination of indigenous rock, natural stone or natural wood exterior finish material. All natural areas shall be accessed and traversed with pedestrian paths and/or bicycle trails that are constructed from environmentally sensitive or permeable surfaces to be approved by the community development director or his designee. There shall be no minimum or maximum size. 
2.  Park. A park is a type of open space that is exposed to the open sky and is made available for unstructured or structured recreation. A park shall be spatially defined on at least two of its sides with a street or a building. A park may be formally or naturalistically disposed, with any combination of flowering plants, grass lawns, natural rock outcroppings, shrubbery and trees. Seating benches and litter receptacles that are of commercial quality shall be required for each park. Open shelters may be provided only if constructed from any combination of indigenous rock, natural stone or natural wood exterior finish material. Parks are encouraged to follow the lineal and natural trajectories of riparian corridors and woodlands. Where provided, all parks shall be no less than one acre in size, but no greater than ten acres in size. 
3.  Playground. A playground is a type of open space that is exposed to the open sky, and is specifically made available for the recreation of children. A playground may be fenced, and may also include an open shelter that is constructed from any combination of indigenous rock, natural stone or natural wood exterior finish material. Playgrounds shall be confined to primarily residential environments, and may be included within natural areas and parks. There shall be no minimum or maximum size for playgrounds. 
4.  Plaza. A plaza is a type of open space that is exposed to the open sky and is made available for unstructured recreation, programmed activities and civic purposes. All plazas shall be spatially defined on all sides with a street or a building containing nonresidential uses on the first floor. Plazas shall be formally disposed with any combination of flowering plants, grass lawns, shrubbery and trees; and public art in the form of a monument, statue, water feature or water fountain shall also be provided in the geographic center of the open space in further support of pedestrian activity. Seating benches and litter receptacles that are of commercial quality shall also be required for all plazas. A minimum of 50 percent and a maximum of 75 percent of the total area of a plaza, excluding sidewalks adjoining streets, shall be hard surfaced. Where provided, all plazas shall be at least one-quarter of an acre in size, but no greater than five acres in size. 
5.  Pocket park. A pocket park is a type of open space that is exposed to the open sky, and is made available for unstructured recreation. A pocket park shall be spatially defined on all sides with a street or a building. Pocket parks shall be naturalistically disposed with any combination of flowering plants, grass lawns, natural rock outcroppings, shrubbery and trees. Where provided, all pocket parks shall be no less than one-quarter of an acre in size, but no greater than one-half acre in size. 
b.  In no such case shall a principal building be more than 1,000 feet from a required, or a provided open space. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of said principal building to the nearest edge of such open space. 
c.  With the exception of plazas, pedestrian paths, and bicycle trails, no more than 15 percent of the required, or provided open space, shall consist of impermeable surfaces, to include parking and loading space areas. 
(8)  Additional limitations and standards for specific uses. 
a.  Gasoline stations with convenience stores. 
1.  Gasoline station canopies and pumps shall not be within 500 feet of a residential building. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of the gasoline station with a convenience store to the nearest property line of any residential building. Furthermore, North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 44711 shall be adhered to. 
2.  All lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare onto the lot where the gasoline station with a convenience store is located. 
b.  Housing developments for older persons (senior housing). 
1.  Notwithstanding any provision for housing developments for older persons to the contrary, at least 75 percent of each building elevation for all dwellings and buildings shall be finished in any combination of brick, indigenous rock or natural stone as specified herein, with each building elevation being calculated independently. 
2.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
c.  Retail and restaurant establishments. 
1.  Restaurants shall front onto a street classified as a collector or arterial. 
2.  Alcoholic beverages shall only be sold as part of a full service meal. 
d.  Automotive parts and repairs. Minor automotive repair and maintenance shall be allowed pursuant to North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 44131. Major repair and service shall be prohibited as defined in NAICS 8111. 
e.  Automotive sales. All structures associated with sales shall follow the requirements as set forth in NAICS 441110. 
(g)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  General. Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building and located on the same lot, shall be permitted. 
(2)  Location. Accessory structures shall be located in the rear yard only. 
(3)  Additional architectural standards. 
a.  Accessory structures shall match the architectural aesthetic of the principal building. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be enclosed or shaded with a pitched roof. 
(4)  Additional limitations and standards for home occupations. A home occupation shall be clearly secondary in use to a detached single-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling, and shall only consist of interior operations and not utilize lot area. 
(h)  Special use permits. Certain uses within this district may require the approval of a special use permit. 
(i)  Housing mix. 
(1)  At least 85 percent of the residential mix shall be allocated towards the construction of detached single-family dwellings; and 
(2)  No greater than 15 percent of the residential mix shall be allocated towards the construction of townhouses, condominiums, duplexes or similar multifamily dwellings. 
(j)  Property owners' associations. All land development and infill proposals occurring on five or more acres of land shall establish a property owners' association. Membership within the property owners' association shall be mandatory for all landowners and their successors in interest. The documents establishing the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the county, and shall also be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. The mandatory property owners association, at a minimum, shall be responsible for the maintenance of common areas and open space as follows: 
(1)  Common areas. The mandatory property owners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all common areas, to include the following: 
a.  Alleys; 
b.  Amenity areas; 
c.  Buffers; 
d.  Fencing; 
e.  Landscaping; 
f.  Opaque walls; and 
g.  Parking and loading areas. 
(2)  Open space. The mandatory property owners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required open space. The instrument for the permanent protection of all required open space shall incorporate restrictions on the uses of open space that are contained in this district, as well as any further restrictions found necessary by the community development director or his designee to provide for the adequate long-term protection of open space consistent with the intent of this district. All required open space shall be permanently protected in accordance with one of the following legal mechanisms: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement that is in favor of one of the following; if the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third party right of enforcement in favor of the city shall be included in the easement: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance of such instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions. 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing the goals compatible with the purpose and intent of this article. 
b.  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c), as amended, a permanent or restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides for permanent protection and is approved by the city attorney. 
(k)  Architectural standards. In furtherance of the purpose and the intent of this district, the architectural standards herein specify the configurations and techniques for building elevations, openings, roofs and other architectural elements. These architectural standards are intended to produce visual compatibility among disparate building types and uses. Because urban quality is enhanced by architectural coherence, but is not necessarily dependent on it, the provisions of these architectural standards range from liberal to strictly deterministic. To this end, the architectural aesthetic of all new buildings, and the restoration and renovation of all existing buildings, shall satisfy the following: 
(1)  The principal pedestrian entrance providing access into each first floor use shall be architecturally distinguished from the other portions of the building elevation through the incorporation of accentual lighting fixtures, awnings, door patterns, glass and/or other similar architectural elements. 
(2)  Blank, and unarticulated exterior walls shall be prohibited. Exterior walls facing frontage lines shall be architecturally modulated to reduce the scale of the building to human scaled proportions, and to provide for visual interest. To accomplish this, variations in architectural modulations shall occur at intervals that are no greater than 40 feet in distance. 
(3)  The exteriors of all buildings shall express the construction techniques and the structural constraints of traditional and long-lasting building wall materials. With the exception of openings for doors and windows, the schedule of exterior finish materials for all buildings within this district shall be limited to: brick, cementitious board (fiber cement board panels and planks), indigenous rock, natural stone, natural wood shake, natural wood shingles, natural wood siding and/or Portland cement plaster and lathe systems (stucco). 
(l)  Sign standards. 
(1)  In addition to the regulations below all signage shall conform with section 108-242. 
(2)  Specific to primary ground signs. 
a.  Residential primary ground signs. 
1.  With the exception of the sign faces only, all residential primary ground signs shall be made of brick, rock, stone, or painted wood. 
2.  Sign faces on residential primary ground signs shall be made of painted wood or metal. 
3.  Sign faces made of cardboard, foam, paper, plastic, unpainted wood, or similar materials are prohibited. 
b.  Nonresidential primary ground signs. 
1.  With the exception of the sign faces only, all nonresidential primary ground signs shall be made of brick, rock, or stone. 
2.  Sign faces on residential primary ground signs shall be made of painted wood or metal. 
3.  Sign faces made of cardboard, foam, paper, plastic, unpainted wood, or similar materials are prohibited. 
4.  Nonresidential primary ground signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
(m)  Screening standards. 
(1)  Detention facilities and ponds. All detention facilities and ponds shall be appropriately screened from pedestrian view from all frontage lines and off-street parking and loading areas. Except for detention facility and pond entrances, all detention facilities and ponds shall be enclosed with an opaque wall that is not less than four feet in height, and that is constructed from an indigenous rock or a natural stone finish material. A black vinyl chain link fence may also be used to satisfy the detention facility and pond visual screening requirement, provided that the black vinyl chain link fence is not less than four feet in height, and is also completely screened by dense evergreen vegetation or trees that are no less than four feet in height at the time of planting and will effectively screen the black vinyl chain link fence and facility. All detention facilities and ponds shall also satisfy the following: 
a.  Unless specified otherwise in this section, in no case shall detention facilities and ponds be permitted in front yards. 
b.  In no case shall any detention facility or pond be located within 100 linear feet of any principal residential building. This distance shall be measured from the nearest property line boundary of any such residential building to the nearest point of the detention facility or pond, including the required visual screening materials. 
c.  In lieu of the detention facility and pond screening requirements, the land developer or the landowner may incorporate detention facilities and ponds into the required landscaping plan for the site as a community amenity or a water feature, in which case, any such detention facilities and ponds may be placed in the front yard and shall not be subject to the visual screening requirements specified herein. 
(2)  Mechanical service elements. All mechanical service elements such as air conditioning units, communications equipment, condensers, exhaust vents, generators, HVAC mechanical equipment systems or other related elements that are located at finished grade shall be completely screened from all frontage lines and off-street parking and loading areas with either dense evergreen hedges, or an opaque wall constructed from a brick, indigenous rock or natural stone finish material that is of an appropriate height and matches the architectural aesthetic of the building. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading areas. All off-street parking areas shall be appropriately screened from all frontage lines with dense evergreen hedges or an opaque wall constructed from a brick, indigenous rock or natural stone finish material that matches the architectural aesthetic of the building. All dense evergreen hedges and opaque walls shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height and a maximum of 42 inches in height, unless otherwise approved by the community development director or his designee. 
(4)  Loading dock and service areas. All loading dock and service areas shall be located in the rear yard only. All loading dock and service areas shall be screened from abutting properties with landscaping to include any combination of dense evergreen vegetation, natural rock outcroppings, and trees or an opaque wall constructed from a brick, indigenous rock or natural stone finish material that matches the architectural aesthetic of the building. All such screening shall be of an appropriate height to conceal loading dock and service areas from view. 
(5)  Underground utilities. All utilities shall run underground. The community development director or his designee may approve an exception to this provision if subsurface rock or other unique physical hardship makes such installation infeasible. If an exception is approved by the community development director or his designee, then all utilities shall be placed in the rear yard only. 
(n)  Landscaping standards. 
(1)  All front yards shall either be planted in sod, or naturalistically disposed with landscaping consisting of trees and any combination of flowering plants, grass lawns, natural rock outcroppings or shrubbery. 
(2)  Fences shall be made from a natural wood finish material that is oiled, painted, stained or varnished or from wrought iron that matches the architectural aesthetic of the principal building (or an equivalent or a superior finish material that faithfully simulates the aesthetic appearance and construction quality of natural wood). Fences that are provided for the front yard shall not exceed four feet in height, and fences provided for the rear and side yards shall be a minimum of four feet in height and a maximum of eight feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the community development director or his designee. 
(3)  Garden walls shall be made from a brick, indigenous rock or natural stone finish material that matches the architectural aesthetic of the principal building. A garden wall may be made from dense evergreen hedges as well. All gates in garden walls shall be made from either a natural wood finish material or wrought iron. Gates shall be no larger than necessary to allow automobile or pedestrian access. The height of all garden walls shall satisfy the following: 
a.  Garden walls that are provided for front yards shall be no less than three feet in height, and no taller than six feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the community development director or his designee in order to allow interior occupants to secure increased privacy for front yards. 
b.  Garden walls that are provided for rear and side yards shall be no less than six feet in height, and no taller than eight feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the community development director or his designee in order to allow occupants to secure increased privacy for rear and side yards. 
(4)  Mass grading for the construction of detached single-family dwellings shall be prohibited. Rather, all grading for the construction of detached single-family dwellings shall follow the natural contours of the lot to minimize human disruptions and visual disruptions to the topography, and to create the impression of a matured landscape. 
(5)  Land development shall be prohibited on slopes that are in excess of 25 percent. 
(6)  Where required due to the natural environmental conditions of the site, all retaining walls shall be faced with a brick, indigenous rock or natural stone finish material. Retaining walls that are greater than four feet in height shall be appropriately screened from pedestrian view from all frontage lines and parking areas with dense evergreen plantings. 
(7)  All on-site lakes, ponds, reservoirs and other similar bodies of water, and riparian corridors, shall remain exposed and open to the sky, undisturbed by intrusive human activity, and incorporated into the landscaping plan for the site or special area plan as a community amenity. 
(o)  Parking standards. 
(1)  Parking calculations. 
a.  Each detached single-family dwelling shall be assigned at least two parking spaces located side-by-side and covered in a garage. 
b.  Townhouse/condo dwelling. 
1.  Each townhouse/condo dwelling shall be assigned at least two parking spaces located side-by-side. 
2.  All parking spaces for townhouse dwellings shall be covered in a garage. 
c.  Each duplex, quadplex or other single story multifamily dwelling shall be assigned at least one, but no more than three parking spaces. 
(2)  Parking locations. Parking spaces for detached single-family dwellings may be located in the front, rear or side yards on a surfaced area. 
(3)  On-street parking. 
a.  On-street parking is prohibited within 25 feet of street intersections. 
b.  On-street parking may be provided on either one side, or both sides of the street with a minimum street width of 24 feet. 
(4)  Shared parking. Shared parking shall be calculated according to the provisions in section 108-275. 
(5)  Bicycle parking. 
a.  All bicycle racks shall be capable of securing bicycles with at least two points of contact. 
b.  All bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground. 
(6)  Specific to garages. Garages may either be attached or detached from a dwelling. 
a.  All detached garages shall match the architectural aesthetic of the dwelling. 
b.  Garages with access openings facing a street shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front building elevation of the principal building. 
c.  Garages with access openings facing an alley shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the alley edge of pavement. 
d.  Garage doors shall have decorative designs that match the architectural aesthetic of the dwelling. 
e.  In no such case shall any garage door with access openings facing frontage lines exceed ten feet in width. 
(7)  Specific to parking lots. 
a.  Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots shall be directly from a frontage line. 
b.  Parking lots shall be screened from all frontage lines. 
(p)  Procedure for review. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a land disturbance permit, the applicant should schedule a conference with the community development director to discuss the standards and procedures that apply. 
(2)  Concept plan application. The applicant shall prepare a concept plan, and submit an application with said concept plan to the community development director on a form provided by the department. The concept plan shall represent the conceptual design of the property to be developed, and all contiguous property that is within the property developer's ownership or control. Concept plans shall include the following information: 
a.  Statement of intent. A written narrative describing the proposed development and explaining how it meets the purpose and intent of this article and the city comprehensive plan. 
b.  Concept plan. All applications shall be accompanied by the required copies of a plan drawn to a designated scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, and certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor licensed by the state, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, and one½ inch by 11-inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Such plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and the person or entity that prepared the concept plan/special area plan; 
2.  Boundaries of the entire property, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
3.  Current zoning; 
4.  Total area of the property in acres; 
5.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics; 
6.  Vicinity map; 
7.  Banks of streams, lakes and other water bodies; 
8.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by FEMA, United States Geological Survey, or the city; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands, as defined by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
9.  Location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction; 
10.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
11.  Property development density and lot sizes for each dwelling unit type; 
12.  Designation of minimum lot areas and yards; 
13.  Location, character and amount of development, by type of use; 
14.  Building use, location, square footage, density and building height for all parcels of land; 
15.  Off-street parking and loading space areas, points of access to the public rights-of-way and motor vehicular circulation patterns within the subject property; 
16.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas; 
17.  Indication that the property is served by public water and/or sewer or private water and/or septic field and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more; 
18.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
19.  Location and width of required transitional buffers at external site boundaries; 
20.  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site or adjacent to the site; 
21.  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities; 
22.  Public rights-of-way, any required or proposed improvements to the public rights-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the right-of-way; 
23.  Width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets and sidewalks. 
24.  A landscaping plan including a tree survey indicating caliper size of existing canopy. Pines shall be omitted; and 
25.  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
(3)  Concept plan review. The community development director shall review the concept plan with respect to its conformity to each of the standards and requirements of this section, and shall prepare a written report documenting the approval or disapproval of the concept plan within ten working days of receipt of the complete concept plan. This report shall document the reasons for disapproval, if disapproved. 
(4)  Approval. 
a.  If approved, the project shall be forwarded on to the planning and zoning commission. All development on the subject property shall conform to the approved concept plan once enacted by the city council. 
b.  Concept plans shall be valid for no more than 180 days from the date of approval. If development plans for the subject property are not submitted within said time period, then the concept plan shall be void. 
(5)  Resubmission. If the concept plan is disapproved, the development proposal shall not proceed until the applicant submits a revised concept plan that meets the standards of this section, and addresses the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the community development director or his designee. 
(q)  Density bonus. 
(1)  Calculation. Density bonus shall be awarded as a percentage of the gross allowable density. For example, if the gross density was 150 developable dwellings a ten percent bonus would net 15 additional dwellings for a total density of 165 dwellings. Each bonus may result in an increase up to ten percent. No more than three or 30 percent total shall be awarded. 
(2)  Considerations. The following items, if achieved, can result in awards of net density. No more than three bonuses can be awarded per project: 
a.  Exceeding open space requirements by 20 percent; 
b.  Providing at least 50 percent of all dwellings with rear entry garages; 
c.  Exceeding the landscape requirements by planting 30 percent more trees; 
d.  Incorporating multi-use trails throughout project and link or provide future link for outside paths; 
e.  Providing 20 percent more than the required parking spaces in residential areas; 
f.  Inclusion of alleys in 50 percent of dwellings; 
g.  Prohibition of any residential improvements in floodplains or wetlands; or 
h.  Exceeding the average lot size by 20 percent. 
(Code 2004, § 152.039; Ord. No. 1709, 8-28-2017) 
Sec. 108-44. - Table of uses. 
Sections 108-45 and 108-46 indicate whether specific land uses are unconditionally permitted or permitted only with a conditional use permit from the planning commission. The planning commission, or its designee, shall determine, upon written request, whether or not any use not listed in the table of uses is similar in character to a described use for the purpose of applying the district regulations and conditions. (See sections 108-400 through 108-403 for the conditional use application procedure.) 
(Code 2004, § 152.045) 
Sec. 108-45. - Table of uses; residential. 

 
Note: "P" is a permitted use, "X" is a use not permitted, "CU" is conditional use and "N/A" is not applicable. 
(Code 2004, § 152.046; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 454, 7-15-2013; Am. Ord. No. 468, 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 1809, 5-24-2018) 
Sec. 108-46. - Table of uses; commercial. 

 
Note: "P" is a permitted use, "X" is a use not permitted, "CU" is conditional use and "N/A" is not applicable. 
(Code 2004, § 152.047; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 428, 4-20-2009; Am. Ord. No. 455, 7-15-2013; Am. Ord. No. 457, 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. No. 468, 7-28-2014; Am. Ord. No. 477, 1-26-2015; Am. Ord. No. 479, 1-26-2015; Am. Ord. No. 488, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 1803, 3-26-2018; Ord. No. 1805, 5-24-2018) 
Secs. 108-47—108-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 108-66. - General provisions. 
(a)  General. The following area, yard, height and size restrictions shall apply to these districts enumerated in sections 108-44 through 108-46. If side yards are provided in the B-1, B-2, or I-1 districts, they should not be less than ten feet in width. If closed courts are provided in any building, the minimum width of the court should not be less than 25 percent of the height of the building. The front yard setback and the side yard requirements as applied to the A-1 Agricultural District pertain to any building incidental to agriculture. 
TABLE I. AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

 
*All permanent structures must be no less than 25 feet from the rear property. 
(b)  Height limitations; exemptions. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limits established by this article for different types of buildings and structures. The height limitations of this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, flagpoles, or public utility facilities. 
(c)  Maximum height limitations. The following maximum heights are established for types of land uses. 
TABLE II. MAXIMUM HEIGHT LIMITATIONS 

 
(d)  Variances to maximum height limitations. The city council may authorize a building or structure to exceed the maximum height limitations for good cause shown, upon application by the owner of the property involved, after a public hearing. 
(e)  Height performance standard. This section provides for additional setback protection from visual impacts of taller buildings. The heights of buildings on properties abutting a single-family dwelling, including a manufactured home, shall be limited according to the provisions of this section. When a non-residential building or structure is proposed to be erected on property that abuts property containing one or more single-family dwellings or manufactured homes, the height of the nonresidential building or structure abutting one or more single-family dwellings or manufactured homes shall meet the requirements of this section. The height of a non-residential building or structure on property abutting a single-family dwelling shall not exceed 35 feet; provided, however, that said non-residential building or structure may be increased in height beyond the 35-foot maximum by one foot for every five feet the nonresidential building is setback from the minimum required side or rear building setback, or ten feet from the side or rear property line if no required side or rear yard is established, up to a maximum required setback of 100 feet. (See figure 5.0.A.) The following table provides maximum heights at five-foot increments of building height based on this performance standard. 

Figure 5.0.A. Building Height
TABLE III. HEIGHT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

 
(Code 2004, § 152.055; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-67. - Yards. 
No building shall hereafter be erected in a manner to have narrower or smaller side yards or rear yards than specified for the use in this article. No part of a required side yard or rear yard shall be included as a part of the yard required for another building. The application of buffer requirements, as established by this article, supersedes these minimum required yards. 
(Code 2004, § 152.056; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-68. - Landscape strips and buffers. 
(a)  Required landscape strips. No lot shall hereafter be developed with less than the minimum required landscape strip for the specific use as shown in table IV, when abutting a public or private street. 
TABLE IV. REQUIRED LANDSCAPE STRIPS AND BUFFERS 

 
(b)  Landscape strip design standards. Landscape strips shall be planted with trees, shrubs, grass, or groundcover, except for those areas that are mulched. Landscaping shall be planted throughout and shall not appear as a single row of plantings. Landscape strips shall not contain structures, accessory uses, parking of any kind, stormwater detention facilities, fences of any kind, patios, or displays of commercial stock. Berms and retaining walls as part of an overall landscaping plan, signs as permitted in this article, driveways required to access the property, pedestrian-oriented facilities, and underground utilities are permitted within the landscape strip. 
(c)  Waiver of landscape strip requirements. The front landscape strips required by this section may be waived for lots which abut one or more developed properties on the same side of the street and which contain a structure that is setback less than ten feet from the right-of-way. 
(d)  Required buffers. No lot shall hereafter be developed with less than the minimum required buffer along a side or rear property line when abutting property containing a single-family dwelling or manufactured home, for the specific use as shown in table IV. 
(e)  Buffer specifications. Any buffer required by this section shall be natural vegetation, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings, and replanted where sparsely vegetated, with evergreen trees and/or shrubs to form an opaque screen that will provide a visual buffer throughout all seasons. Buffers shall be designed to provide privacy and security and to give adequate protection to adjacent neighbors from lights, sounds, and other potential nuisances. Buffers shall be planted with landscaping throughout and shall not appear as a single row of plantings. The length of any required buffers shall not extend closer than 15 feet to any public right-of-way in order to preserve vision clearance. 
(f)  Structural buffer design standards. When commercial construction abuts residential property, a minimum six-foot tall wooden slat fence must be installed. Fences and walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property and shall be located in such a manner to preserve existing vegetation. 
(g)  Reduction of buffer. A required buffer may be reduced by as much as 30 percent through the site plan review process for multifamily, institutional residential living facilities, places of worship, schools, daycare centers, and other institutional uses if screening is provided by installing a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence or masonry wall within the required buffer. 
(Code 2004, § 152.057; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 475, 12-22-2014) 
Secs. 108-69—108-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

Sec. 108-95. - Purpose. 
This section is designed to collect in one place the regulations with respect to specific uses. 
(Code 2004, § 152.065; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-96. - Accessory buildings, structures, and uses. 
On any lot where detached, single-family dwellings, manufactured homes or attached single-family dwellings (townhouses) are the principal use, customary accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Accessory uses, buildings, and structures shall be located in a rear yard. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed the height of the principal structure. 
(3)  Accessory buildings having a floor area less than 400 square feet in size must be at least five feet from any property line. Accessory buildings having a floor area more than 400 square feet in size shall comply with the underlying zoning regulations for side setbacks and shall be located at least ten feet from the rear property line. No accessory building shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement. 
(4)  Accessory structures, including swimming pools, decks and patios, shall be located a minimum of five feet from any property line. No accessory structure shall be placed within any drainage or utility easement. 
(5)  In no case shall an accessory building or structure exceed the square footage of the principal building or structure to which it is accessory. 
(6)  Accessory structures and buildings must be constructed in conjunction with or after a building permit for the principal building is lawfully approved. 
(7)  Accessory buildings may be constructed of any type of material, provided that such structures are hidden from plain view. For example, such structure may be behind the primary building so as to obscure it from plain view from a publicly traveled road, or it may be obscured by either a fence or vegetation. If the building is not hidden from plain view, it shall maintain a facade of fiber-cement siding, wood siding, wood-textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, stucco or synthetic stucco, or finished/baked enamel aluminum/metal siding that establishes a horizontal pattern. For buildings not obscured from view, the roofing materials shall be constructed of the same materials as the roof of the primary structure. 
(8)  Accessory buildings, structures, and principal buildings cannot exceed 50 percent of the lot size. 
(Code 2004, § 152.066; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 433, 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. No. 447, 6-18-2012; Am. Ord. No. 468, 7-28-2014) 
Sec. 108-97. - Agricultural, farm, and livestock structures and uses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(b)  Buildings. Buildings and structures related to agriculture, farming, or the keeping of livestock, shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. 
(c)  Lot size. The minimum lot size for the keeping of livestock shall be five acres. One horse may be boarded for non-commercial use on a lot containing five acres or more in area, and an additional acre of area shall be required for each additional horse to be boarded. 
(Code 2004, § 152.067; Ord. No. 483, 8-24-2015) 
Sec. 108-98. - Alcoholic beverage sales. 
Comply with each site requirement as provided in chapter 4, alcoholic beverages. 
Sec. 108-99. - Amphitheaters. 
(a)  The lot area shall be a minimum of ten acres. 
(b)  The stage shall be located a minimum of 600 feet from any property containing a residential use. 
(c)  Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial street. 
(d)  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be provided along any property line containing a residential use. 
(e)  A minimum 50-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to any property line containing a non-residential use. 
(f)  A maximum continuous sound level of 60 dBA and a maximum peak sound level of 75 dBA shall be observed adjacent to residential uses. 
(g)  Security fencing shall be provided adjacent to residential uses. 
(h)  The hours of operation of the facility shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when any property line containing a residential use abuts the facility. 
(Code 2004, § 152.068; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-100. - Automobile sales establishments. 
Establishments that sell, rent, or lease automobiles must provide parking specifically identified and devoted to customers. Adequate space must be allocated, specifically identified, and reserved on the site for the unloading of vehicles brought to the site by car carriers. It shall be a violation to park vehicles for sale, rent, or lease in customer parking or unloading areas. Outside loudspeakers shall not be permitted when adjacent to a residential use. 
(Code 2004, § 152.069; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-101. - Automobile salvage yards and junkyards. 
Automobile salvage yards and junkyards shall be completely enclosed by a solid wooden fence having a height of eight feet or more if necessary, which shall be installed along all property lines to effectively screen all operations from view. All doors or gates to such yard shall be the same height of the fence, shall be constructed of solid wood and shall swing so as not to project beyond the property line. A 25-foot natural buffer must surround the perimeter of the property. 
(Code 2004, § 152.070; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-102. - Churches, temples, synagogues, and places of worship. 
Churches and their customary accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any side or rear property line, and within the 50-foot setback required along side and rear property lines, a minimum 25-foot wide natural buffer shall be provided. 
(Code 2004, § 152.071; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-103. - Communication towers. 
(a)  Towers/accessory structures must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any property containing a residential use. 
(b)  The tower and/or associated facilities shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(c)  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be required around the facility exterior to any fence or wall unless the community development director determines that existing plant materials are adequate. 
(d)  The tower shall comply with applicable state and local statutes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and safety codes. 
(e)  Communication towers/antennas shall not be artificially lighted except to ensure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 2004, § 152.072; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-104. - Daycare centers. 
Daycare centers and nursery schools shall have at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area and at least 35 square feet of indoor space provided for each child or other person served. A fence with a minimum height of four feet shall enclose the outdoor play area. 
(Code 2004, § 152.073; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-105. - Drive-through facilities. 
Drive-through facilities shall not be located within 50 feet of public rights-of-way or within 50 feet from any property containing a residential use. Stacking lanes for drive-through facilities must be designed in a manner so that vehicle queuing does not interfere with access driveways, interparcel connections, or maneuverability in and out of off-street parking spaces. Stacking lanes shall be clearly identified through the use of striping, landscaping, and/or signs, and stacking lanes for fast-food establishments shall provide a means for vehicles to escape from the drive-through queuing stream. 
(Code 2004, § 152.074; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-106. - Dwellings, single-family attached (townhouses). 
Fee-simple townhouses shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Each platted lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage on a private road that meets public street standards of the city. 
(2)  Zero lot line between units within the same building shall be permitted, subject to applicable fire and building codes. 
(3)  To avoid a monotonous appearance, no more than five townhouse units shall be included in any one building. Any building containing more than three units with common walls must have the roof of each attached unit distinct from the other through separation or offsets in roof design. 
(4)  Each townhouse development or phase thereof shall require subdivision plat approval. 
(Code 2004, § 152.075; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-107. - Extractive industries. 
Any facility engaged in the extraction of earth products, such as sand, soil, gravel, rock, stone, clay, or other mining operations, etc. shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Permanent roads, defined as those to be used in excess of one year, within the excavation site shall be surfaced with a dust-free material. 
(2)  Roads other than permanent roads shall be treated with dust inhibitors that will reduce the generation from dust from the road surfaces as a result of wind or vehicular action. 
(3)  The proposed extraction shall not take place within 300 feet of a property containing a dwelling, school, church, hospital, or public building. 
(4)  Product piles, spoil piles, and other accumulations of by-products shall not be created to a height more than 35 feet above the original contour. 
(5)  All blasting operations shall occur between sunrise and one hour after sunset. 
(Code 2004, § 152.076; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-108. - Golf driving ranges. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be ten acres or one acre per tee, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Vehicular access shall be derived only from a major collector or higher road classification. 
(c)  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited when residential uses are located adjacent to driving ranges. 
(d)  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. when any property containing a residential use abuts the facility. 
(e)  The depth of a driving range along the driving area shall be at least 350 yards measured from the location of the tees and the width shall be not less than 200 yards at a distance of 350 yards from the tees. 
(Code 2004, § 152.077; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-109. - Helicopter landing facilities. 
Helicopter landing facilities must meet applicable safety standards of the Federal Aviation Administration, state safety standards, and fire suppression and safety standards of the fire marshal. Helicopter landing pads shall be at least 200 feet from any property containing a residential use and at least 50 feet from all other property lines. All take-off, landing, and parking areas for helicopter landing facilities must be surfaced with a dust-proof material. 
(Code 2004, § 152.078; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-110. - Kennels. 
(a)  A minimum one-acre lot size is required. 
(b)  Buildings, animal runs, sun areas, and exercise yards shall be located at least 100 feet from all property lines and 200 feet from any property containing a residential use. 
(c)  Indoor enclosures (cages, kennels or runs) shall be provided for each animal housed. These enclosures shall be constructed of an impervious material. Floors shall be metal, fiberglass, concrete or covered throughout with a minimum of three inches of gravel. Enclosures must be cleaned daily with a disinfectant, cleanser or chlorine bleach. Cleaning materials must be present at the time of any inspection in amounts sufficient to clean the entire facility. Animals must be removed from enclosures during cleaning. 
(d)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained by means of windows, doors, vents, and fans. 
(e)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down, and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or top of the enclosure. If additional space is not provided, either indoor or outdoor, then this enclosure must provide an adequate exercise area. 
(f)  Outdoor runs or enclosures may be provided in addition to the indoor enclosures. These outdoor enclosures may be separated or attached to the indoor enclosures. 
(g)  All enclosures shall be kept clean and dry. 
(h)  All enclosures shall provide protection from the weather. 
(i)  The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(j)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times except as part of a veterinary treatment regimen. Water vessels shall be mounted or secure in a manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable type, except in areas where animals are kept for medical recuperative purposes. 
(Code 2004, § 152.079; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-111. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  General requirements. Satellite dish antennas are allowed in any zoning district, as long as all requirements outlined in this section are complied with. General requirements apply to all satellite dish installations. 
(1)  Permanent installation. Satellite dishes must be permanently installed on a building, in the ground or on a foundation, not on a portable or movable structure, such as a trailer. 
(2)  Cables. Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish antennas must be located underground. 
(3)  Electromagnetic interference. Satellite dishes must be filtered or shielded to prevent radio-frequency energy emissions that would cause harmful interference with radio or TV reception or broadcasting on neighboring properties. 
(4)  Construction, installation and operation. Compliance with all federal, state and local regulations is required. 
(5)  Maintenance. All exposed surfaces and supports of the antenna must be kept clean and painted to achieve a well-maintained appearance in keeping with all approvals. The city can require repair or removal of antennas that are damaged, deteriorated or no longer in use. 
(b)  Commercial/industrial property. In addition to the general requirements, the following regulations apply to satellite dish antennas greater than one meter in diameter within non-residential zoning districts: 
(1)  Size. Maximum allowed height: 
a.  Commercial retail sites: 12 feet. 
b.  Broadcast studios, office, manufacturing and warehouse uses: larger antennas are permitted, up to the maximum allowed building height, except that roof-mounted antennas must not extend more than 12 feet over the maximum permitted building height. 
(2)  Number. Multiple antennas may be permitted. However, multiple antennas greater than 12 feet in height will be subject to final plan review by the planning commission. 
(3)  Ground-mounted location and setback. A dish is allowed on any portion of the lot, except between a right-of-way line and the corresponding building line. It must be set back inside the property line a distance that is at least equal to its height, but not less than ten feet from the property line. 
(4)  Roof-mounting. This is permitted if the satellite dish antenna is in scale with the overall building mass and location. The visible portion of the dish should not be more than 25 percent of the corresponding height or width of the underlying building or screen. The building edge or screening should obscure the lower part of the support structure and all accessory equipment from ground-level views within 1,000 feet of the antenna. 
(5)  Offsite locations. A satellite dish antenna may be located on another property, if that property owner gives permission in writing. 
(Code 2004, § 152.080; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 460, 1-27-2014) 
Sec. 108-112. - Solid waste handling facilities. 
(a)  Access from paved streets, with acceleration and deceleration lanes, built according to state DOT specifications, shall be required. 
(b)  Access shall not be allowed through any residential subdivision or residential development. 
(c)  A minimum 100-foot wide buffer is required adjacent to any property line containing a residential use. 
(d)  A minimum 50-foot wide buffer is required adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
(e)  A minimum six-foot high solid fence/wall shall be required inside buffers adjacent to any property line containing a residential use. 
(f)  The owner shall provide the community development director with a current copy of a state solid waste-handling permit prior to applying for a land disturbance permit. 
(g)  Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
(Code 2004, § 152.081; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-113. - Mini-warehouses. 
(a)  The minimum lot size for a mini-warehouse development shall be two acres, and the maximum developed area for a mini-warehouse shall be four acres. 
(b)  Individual storage units shall not be used for the storage of hazardous materials or toxic substances. The use of individual storage units for living, sales, or hobbies is prohibited. 
(c)  No individual mini-warehouse building shall be more than 200 feet long. 
(d)  Fencing adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be required in the form of an architecturally finished wall or solid, opaque wooden fence. 
(e)  Mini-warehouse developments shall not be accessible to the general public (excluding on-site managers) between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(f)  All buildings shall be made of brick and will follow the design guidelines as approved. 
(Code 2004, § 152.082; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-114. - Roadside stands and produce markets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Produce or farmers market means structures, buildings, and/or areas no more than 3,500 square feet in size, including any outside display area and are primarily used to sell raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in its raw or natural state for profit. The term "produce or farmers market" also may be used for limited sales of processed foods and non-food items. Produce markets are temporary in nature (six months or less in one location). 
Produce stand means structures, buildings, and/or areas no more than 400 square feet in size and are used to sell only raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts and other agricultural produce in its raw or natural state for profit. Produce stands are temporary in nature (six months or less in one location). 
(b)  General standards. 
(1)  Up to two produce stands or one produce market per parcel is allowed, subject to staff approval of a site plan. Produce stands and markets may be located in the B-1, B-2, and B-3 zoning districts. 
(2)  There shall be no sales of fuel and related products, tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, lottery tickets, vehicles or related products. 
(3)  Food franchises are prohibited in any roadside stand or produce market operation. 
(4)  Signage shall follow guidelines for temporary signage in this article according to the underlying zoning or district. Signage shall only be installed while the stand or market is in operation and has a maximum period of six months. 
(c)  Off-street parking required. 
(1)  To ensure public safety, roadside stands and produce markets shall be required to have off-street parking and adequate ingress and egress with an area for turnaround. 
(2)  Roadside stands and produce markets will be required to be on a lot with a recognized curb cut and with an area to turn-around. There shall be one ten by 20-foot parking area per 400 square feet of selling and display area, with a minimum of two spaces. Parking spaces are exclusive of driveways, turnarounds, and spaces devoted to other uses on site. Entrances and exits onto public roadways must have an all-weather surface. 
(d)  Building and structure requirements. A temporary structure, such as a pop up tent or canopy, is permitted. Said structure shall be removed from the lot at the end of each business day. While on the lot, the structure shall be tethered or in some way attached to the ground in a manner that ensures that the structure is secure and does not pose a hazard. Selling from an automobile is also permitted, but the automobile shall be removed from the lot at the end of each business day. 
(e)  Location requirements. Stands and markets shall not be placed in any landscape strip, buffer area, or within required side or rear setbacks. Stands and markets shall be placed a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way to the front of the sales or display area. In B-1 districts, this can be reduced to five feet from the right-of-way. If placed in a parking area, the stand and/or market shall not infringe on required parking spaces for on-site land uses. 
(f)  Permit required. A permit is required prior to engaging in any selling or display activities as set forth in this section. To obtain approval for a roadside stand and/or produce market the following shall be required: 
(1)  Provide a written agreement between the applicant and property owner or their agent permitting use of the property by the applicant and a plat of the property if the applicant is not the owner of said property. 
(2)  Provide a site plan of the property indicating location of stand and/or market and parking. 
(Code 2004, § 152.083; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 478, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 108-115. - Shooting ranges. 
The minimum site size for a skeet or trap shooting range shall be 15 acres. The minimum site size for a rifle range shall be 20 acres. Ranges shall have an earth embankment not less than 25 feet in height and not less than ten feet in width at the end of the range to serve as a back stop. 
(Code 2004, § 152.084; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-116. - Storage of petroleum products and explosives. 
No storage of petroleum products or explosives shall be permitted until the necessary permits and approvals from the state fire marshal and/or federal agency, as may be required, are obtained. No such storage area shall be located within 500 feet of property containing a residential use. 
(Code 2004, § 152.085; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-117. - Service and fuel filling stations. 
Service and fuel filling stations, including convenience stores with gasoline pumps, shall have all fuel pumps located at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. All buildings and appurtenances must be located at least 100 feet from any property containing a residential use. All fuel must be stored underground outside of any public right-of-way. All structures, including storage tanks, shall be placed not less than 30 feet from any property line. 
(Code 2004, § 152.086; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-118. - Temporary structures. 
No house trailer, truck trailer, or similar mobile structure of any kind shall be used for storage purposes, temporary office purposes or parked within the residential, business or professional districts of the city, except that such a use may be permitted in connection with a construction project or for a temporary period of time not to exceed 30 days per year. 
(Code 2004, § 152.087; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-119. - Uses generating truck traffic. 
Any use which generates more than ten truck trips during a peak travel hour or 100 average daily truck trips shall provide deceleration lanes for the use of trucks leaving the road, as approved by the community development director. 
(Code 2004, § 152.088; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-120. - Indoor firing range. 
(a)  Design shall follow guidelines set in place by the Whole Building Design Guide, National Rifle Association, International Building Code, and OSHA. 
(b)  Property owners within a 200-yard radius of the property line shall be informed of the intentions to construct an indoor firing range. 
(c)  Proof of insurance will be required upon issuance of initial business license and subsequent renewals. 
(Code 2004, § 152.089; Ord. No. 455, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 108-121. - Donation bins. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place or employ a donation bin on private property within the city without first obtaining an annual permit. 
(b)  Application for permit; renewal. Any person or entity desiring a permit under this section shall apply for an annual permit with the community development director on a form furnished by the city. Said permit shall expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. Permittee shall be allowed ten business days from the expiration of the permit to renew before penalties shall be assessed as a Code violation. 
(c)  Insurance required. Any person or entity applying for a permit under this section shall provide a certificate evidencing a general liability insurance policy of a minimum of $100,000.00, providing notice to the city at least ten days prior to any change or termination of coverage. 
(d)  Location and placement. Donation bins shall only be permitted in business, professional, and industrial zoning classifications within the city. Donation bins shall follow the following criteria: 
(1)  No donation bin shall be placed in such a manner that it projects onto or over any part of any public roadway or any public streets. 
(2)  No donation bin shall be placed in such a manner that it rests in whole or in part upon any portion of a public right-of-way or projects onto or over any part of a public right-of-way. 
(3)  No donation bin shall be placed within a required buffer area. 
(4)  No donation bin shall be placed within 25 feet of any driveway, fire hydrant, or crosswalk. 
(5)  Any person or entity shall be allowed to place no more than one donation bin per parcel or location with a total of three donation bins allowed per parcel or location. 
(6)  Donation bins shall be placed on a hard, level, and weather-resistant surface. 
(7)  Screening shall be in a manner to effectively shield the bin from being viewed from the public right-of-way as determined by community development director on a case-by-case basis. Screening may include vegetation. 
(8)  Donated materials or clothing shall not be placed on or around the exterior of the bin. Violations shall be treated as a public nuisance and be abated within ten business days or face penalties. 
(e)  Design and size standards. 
(1)  Donation bins shall not exceed the maximum size of 12 feet in length by six feet in width by six feet in height. 
(2)  Donation bins shall be entry-proof and designed to avoid the entrapment of children. 
(3)  The name, website, telephone number and address of the registered person or entity who owns the bin, and any other entity which may share in the profit from any clothing or other material collected via the bin, shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior. 
(4)  Donation bins and screening shall not be utilized for any advertising, signage, or other promotional materials other than the display of the information provided for in this section. 
(f)  Time and notification of decision. The planning and zoning department shall have 30 business days to issue or deny the permit. A notification of issuance or denial of the permit shall be delivered by hand delivery or by mailing such notice to the applicant's address on or before the 30th business day. If denied, the notice shall state the reasons for denial. 
(g)  Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning department to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director no later than ten days after the denial or revocation of the permit. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least 14 days after the notice of appeal has been filed. A final written decision on the appeal shall be rendered by the city council no more than 30 days from the date the appeal was heard. 
(Code 2004, § 152.090; Ord. No. 458, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 108-122. - Residential backyard chickens. 
(a)  General requirements. Lots zoned for single-family use shall be permitted to keep backyard chickens for the expressed purpose of egg production under this section. 
(b)  Number of chickens. Chickens shall be limited to more than six per lot. Roosters are not permitted. 
(c)  Coops required. Coops housing chickens shall be required and provide a minimum of three square feet of space per chicken. Construction of coops shall follow accessory building guidelines set forth in section 108-96, shall have both a roof and walls, and shall be adequately ventilated. Coops shall be maintained in a clean manner and free of vermin. Runs are permitted, but must be fully enclosed with poultry netting or a similar material. Runs shall not count towards the square footage requirement. 
(d)  Location. Coops and runs shall not be placed less than 25 feet from any property line and shall be in the rear yard. 
(e)  Fencing required. The area housing the coop and run shall be fenced in to prevent chickens leaving the lot. 
(f)  Inspection and permit required. Before issuing a permit to keep backyard chickens, the community development director or their appointee shall inspect the premises for the criteria set forth in this section. A permit shall be required to keep backyard chickens and application shall be made on forms provided by the department. The department shall have 30 business days to issue or deny the permit. A notification of issuance or denial of the permit shall be delivered by hand delivery or by mailing such notice to the applicant's address on or before the 30th business day. If denied, the notice shall state the reasons for denial. 
(g)  Revocation of permit. If a permittee is found to be in violation of this section or adopted nuisance codes and fails to address the issue in the allotted timeframe, the department shall pursue revocation of the issued permit. 
(h)  Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the community development director to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director no later than ten days after the denial or revocation of the permit. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least 14 days after the notice of appeal has been filed. A final written decision on the appeal shall be rendered by the city council no more than 30 days from the date the appeal was heard. 
(Code 2004, § 152.091; Ord. No. 470, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 108-123. - Massage therapy. 
Applicants shall be required to provide proof of licensure in the state for massage therapy as established in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A or as amended upon initial application and subsequent annual applications for an occupational tax. Any employee who also performs massage therapy shall be required to provide proof of licensure annually. Failure to provide proof of licensure shall be grounds for revocation of the occupational tax. 
(Code 2004, § 152.092; Ord. No. 479, 1-26-2015) 
Sec. 108-124. - Body art establishment, body art studio, tattoo establishment, tattoo parlor, or tattoo studio. 
All body artists shall provide proof of a county board of health issued body art license to the city prior to providing body art services at a location in the city. 
(Code 2004, § 152.093; Ord. No. 488, 1-25-2016) 
Sec. 108-125. - Animal operations. 
(a)  Purpose. The city is committed to protecting the waters of the state through its constitutional power of zoning. As animal operations have the possibility of adversely impacting the waters of the state through various means, a specialized permitting process is required for any animal operation proposed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Animal operation (AO) defined. An animal operation is broadly defined as any facilities in which animals are raised or brought for slaughter with a large perpetual inventory and density of animals. 
(c)  Animal feeding operation (AFO) defined. An animal feeding operation is an operation where animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of four days or more in any 12-month period and where vegetation is not sustained in the confinement area during the normal growing season. (Reference CRF 122.23(b)(1)). 
(d)  Animal unit defined. The term "animal unit" is utilized by federal and state agencies and offices as a means of standardizing the potential impact of different animals upon the waters of the state. The most typical animal unit standard is the "300 AU" standard meaning three hundred animal units. The number of animals in any of the following categories is equivalent to 300 AU: 
(1)  300 slaughter and feeder cattle; 
(2)  200 mature dairy cattle (whether milked or dry cows); 
(3)  150 horses; 
(4)  750 swine each weighing over 25 kilograms (approximately 55 pounds); 
(5)  3,000 sheep or lambs; 
(6)  16,000 turkeys; 
(7)  30,000 laying hens or broilers (if the facility has continuous overflow watering); 
(8)  9,000 laying hens or broilers (if the facility has a liquid manure handling system); 
(9)  1,500 ducks. 
(e)  Concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO) defined. The term "concentrated animal feeding operation" means an animal feeding operation if it means the regulatory definition of a large or medium CAFO, 40 CFR parts 122.23 (b)(4) or (6), is expected to be designated as a CAFO, 40 CFR part 122.23 (c), by the NPDES permitting authority (director of the state environmental protection division) or by the EPA. 
(f)  Any animal feeding operation or concentrated animal feeding operation proposing to operate within the corporate limits of the city shall only be permitted to operate within an A-1 agriculture or I-1 industrial zoned property and only then after being granted a conditional use land permit by the city planning and zoning commission upon completion of the conditional use application process. 
(g)  Any proposed commercial operation maintaining over 25 animal units for the purpose of feeding and selling for commercial gain shall only be permitted to operate within an A-1 agricultural or I-1 industrial zoned property and only then after being granted a conditional use land use permit by the city planning and zoning commission upon the completion of the conditional use application process. 
(h)  The community development director may request additional information for the conditional use permit process to document possible impacts upon the waters of the state. 
(i)  Nothing in this section shall interfere with the permitted keeping of residential backyard chickens. 
(Ord. No. 1808, 05-24-2018) 
Secs. 108-126—108-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MANUFACTURED HOME REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-149. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure that manufactured homes are installed on a site according to applicable federal and manufacturer's requirements. This article is also intended to ensure architectural compatibility of manufactured homes with adjacent single-family residences and other land uses through the application of architectural compatibility standards. 
(Code 2004, § 152.095; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-150. - Land use permit required. 
No manufactured home shall be installed on any site, nor shall any such manufactured home be occupied or used for any purpose until and unless a community development director issues a land use permit. The community development director shall not issue a land use permit for installing, occupying, or using a manufactured home unless it is in conformity with all the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 152.096; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-151. - Basic installation requirements. 
(a)  Foundation. Each manufactured home must be set on a permanent foundation. 
(b)  Hauling mechanisms removed. The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles and hitch, must be removed prior to occupancy. 
(c)  Installation regulations. The manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the installation instructions from the manufacturer, as appropriate. 
(d)  Approved septic system. Each manufactured home shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer system, or on-site septic system with capacity available as approved by the health officer. 
(Code 2004, § 152.097; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-152. - Type 1 compatibility standards. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to only manufactured home parks (sections 108-177 through 108-181) within the city and is illustrated in figure 7.3.A. 
(b)  Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
(c)  Skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete or siding of like or similar character to the manufactured home that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage except for proper ventilation and access openings. 

Figure 7.3.A. Manufactured Homes Unrestricted and Type 1
(d)  Exterior finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, or plastic siding material. 
(e)  Roof pitch and materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least two feet in height for each 12 feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, asphalt shingle, coated metal, or similar material. 
(Code 2004, § 152.098; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-153. - Type 2 compatibility standards. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all manufactured homes sited on lots located within 500 feet of two or more existing site-built single-family residences and is illustrated in figure 7.4.A. 
(b)  Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
(c)  Masonry skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure of each manufactured home and the ground, including stairways, shall be underpinned with masonry that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage and attached stairways except for proper ventilation and access openings. 

Figure 7.4.A. Manufactured Homes Types 2 and 3
(d)  Exterior finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, or plastic siding material. 
(e)  Roof pitch and materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least 6/12 roof pitch in height for each 12 feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material. 
(f)  Covered porch or deck. A covered porch, deck, or entry area at least ten feet by ten feet shall be added for each entrance to the manufactured home prior to occupancy. 
(Code 2004, § 152.099; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-154. - Compatibility standards. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to areas where the strictest compatibility standards are necessary to ensure architectural harmony of manufactured homes with adjacent and nearby site-built homes and other land uses. These standards shall apply in addition to the type 2 compatibility standards provided in section 108-153 and are illustrated in figure 7.4.A. 
(b)  Width. The manufactured home shall consist of two fully enclosed parallel sections and a total width of at least 28 feet. 
(c)  Covered porch. A covered porch or deck shall be provided along the entire length of the manufactured home facing the front yard or street prior to occupancy, with a ten-foot minimum depth. 
(d)  Additional architectural features. The manufactured home shall contain eaves with a minimum projection of six inches, window shutters, and at least one additional architectural feature such as dormers, bay windows, or another architectural feature that will provide equal compatibility with surrounding residences and land uses, as approved by the community development director. 
(e)  Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
(f)  Roof pitch and materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least 6/12 roof pitch in height for each 12 feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material. 
(Code 2004, § 152.100; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Secs. 108-155—108-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 108-177. - Purpose. 
This section regulates manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks and campgrounds, which provide for affordable permanent and temporary housing or seasonal recreational developments. Manufactured home parks are intended to provide for the leasing of spaces for the placement of manufactured homes, owned or rented by tenants, as well as spaces or campsites for recreational vehicles, within a planned residential community, park, or campground. A manufactured home park is different from a residential subdivision in that the individual spaces for manufactured homes, campsites, or recreational vehicles are leased rather than platted and sold. By requiring less land per home or vehicle space, manufactured home parks are built at densities greater than those for other detached dwellings. Service facilities such as laundry and leasing offices are often planned and provided as a part of the park development. 
(Code 2004, § 152.105; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-178. - Site plan review and land use permit required. 
No manufactured home park shall be developed until and unless a site plan shall have been approved by the community development director and city engineer and a land use permit is issued by the community development director. The community development director shall not issue a land use permit for a manufactured home park unless it is in conformity with all the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2004, § 152.106; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-179. - Site conditions and site planning. 
(a)  Site conditions. Manufactured home parks shall be sited on land that is not subject to hazards such as flooding, erosion, land subsidence, and areas with possible insect or rodent infestation. The condition of the soil, groundwater level, drainage, rock formations, and topography shall be appropriate for the use to ensure that no hazards to the property or to the health and safety of the occupants occurs. 
(b)  Site planning. Planning for the manufacturing home park should be adapted to individual site conditions and the type of use or uses served, reflect advances in site planning techniques, and be adapted to the trends in the design of the manufactured home or recreational vehicle itself. Site planning and improvements shall provide for facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the occupants; safe, comfortable, and sanitary use by the occupants under all weather conditions; and practical and efficient operation and maintenance of all facilities at reasonable costs. The street and block pattern for the park shall be designed to attain proper sizes and shapes of manufactured home spaces so as to provide desirable areas and to reduce excessive length of street construction without impairing convenient circulation and access. 
(Code 2004, § 152.107; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-180. - General development requirements. 
Manufactured home parks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Site frontage, access and minimum width. Properties containing manufactured home parks shall have a minimum of 200 feet of property frontage on a public street, and direct vehicular access to the manufactured home park shall be provided by means of an abutting public street with at least 200 feet of property frontage. The manufactured home park shall have a minimum lot width of 200 feet throughout the entire depth of the developed portion of the property. (See figure 8.3.A.) 
(2)  Perimeter buffer or landscape screen. A minimum 20-foot wide buffer, where natural vegetation exists and provides a more or less opaque screen; or, where no natural vegetation forming an opaque screen exists, a minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip with evergreen trees that will grow to a height of at least six feet within three years shall be installed and maintained around the entire perimeter of the development, except for approved access and utility crossings. (See figure 8.3.A.) 
(3)  Open space and recreational areas. A minimum of 20 percent of the site area shall be open space and recreational area, including the required perimeter buffer or landscape screen. A minimum of eight percent of the total site area, counted as part of the required 20 percent site area that is open space and recreation area, shall be devoted to one or more active recreation facilities. 

Figure 8.3.A. Manufactured Home Park Design
(4)  Community services. As part of the site plan review process, the developer may propose and the city may approve one or more other structures for manufactured home park occupants, such as laundries, storage, garages, and a park leasing or management office. Any structure that draws its trade from outside the park boundaries is prohibited. 
(5)  Interior access roads, addresses and signing. The road system within the manufactured home park shall be designed to meet the requirements of the county fire marshal and the traveling public to include the following: 
a.  All interior roads shall be private but constructed to provide fire apparatus access. 
b.  All interior roads shall be paved. 
c.  One-way interior roads shall be constructed with a minimum surface width of 14 feet, and shall be designated "no parking." 
d.  Two-way interior roads shall be constructed with a minimum surface width of 24 feet, and shall be designated "no parking." 
e.  Interior roads shall be clearly marked at each intersection with signs to identify traffic directions and space numbers served by the road. 
f.  Driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for convenient access to service entrances of buildings, to delivery and collection points for refuse and other material, and elsewhere as needed. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(6)  Guest parking. In addition to on-site parking, guest parking spaces shall be provided as part of the development, at a ratio of one parking space per each six manufactured home spaces. Guest parking spaces shall be grouped and distributed evenly throughout the manufactured home park. 
(7)  Utilities. All manufactured home parks, and each manufactured home space within the park, shall be served by approved public water and public sanitary sewer and electricity. All utilities shall be installed underground with aboveground connections. 
(8)  Drainage. Drainage facilities shall be designed by an engineer and are subject to the approval of the city engineer as part of the site plan review process. 
(9)  Refuse collection. Each manufactured home park shall provide refuse collection pads at locations convenient to each manufactured home space. 
(10)  Walkways. Sidewalks shall be required along one side of all interior streets and in areas where pedestrian traffic is expected, such as around recreation, management, mailbox groupings, if provided, and community services areas. 
(11)  Park rules. The property owner or manager shall submit operating rules and regulations governing the park to the community development director prior to occupancy. 
(Code 2004, § 152.108; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-181. - Requirements for manufactured home spaces. 
(a)  Design. Each manufactured home space shall be designed and constructed at such elevation, distance, and angle with respect to its access to provide for safe and efficient placement and removal of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles, as the case may be. Each manufactured home space shall be designed with no more than a five percent gradient and compacted with appropriate material to support maximum anticipated loads during all seasons. 

Figure 8.4.A. Manufactured Home Park and Spaces
(b)  Width, depth and size of spaces and markings. Each manufactured home space shall be at least 40 feet wide and 75 feet in depth. The minimum area for a manufactured home space shall be 10,000 square feet. The corners of each manufactured home space shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, makers, or by other similar means. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(c)  Stands. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a concrete pad of sufficient size to accommodate the typical manufactured home to be located within that space, and the pad should be large enough to accommodate a patio of at least 180 square feet and also provide for the anchoring of the home to secure it against movement; provided, however, that any individual stand shall be no less than 14 feet by 60 feet and spaces intended to serve double-wide homes shall be at least 24 feet by 60 feet. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(d)  Use of spaces. No more than one manufactured home or recreational vehicle shall occupy any individual space. Use of a manufactured home shall not be permitted in the manufactured home park. Accessory uses and structures on individual spaces may be permitted, subject to compliance with the development standards provided in this division. 
(e)  Space identification numbers. Manufactured home space numbers at least four inches in height shall identify each space and shall remain readily identifiable while in use. 
(f)  Parking. Two on-site parking spaces shall be provided on each manufactured home space or immediately off-site. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(g)  Walkways. A walkway at least two feet wide must be provided from each individual space to connect the manufactured home with the common walk or street. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(h)  Setbacks. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet to a manufactured home space boundary, and spaces shall be designed to provide for a minimum of 15 feet of separation between manufactured homes on abutting spaces. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(i)  Additions and accessory structures. Decks, porches, outdoor storage, or other exterior additions may be constructed or erected on a manufactured home space, subject to the approval of the manufactured home park management. No such accessory structure shall be located closer than five feet to a manufactured home space boundary. (See figure 8.4.A.) 
(j)  Maximum density. The total number of spaces and total number of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles within the manufactured home park shall not exceed ten homes or vehicles or a combination thereof per acre. 
(Code 2004, § 152.109; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Secs. 108-182—108-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOME BUSINESS USES 

Sec. 108-201. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to protect residential neighborhoods, with detached single-family residences on lots containing approximately one acre or less, from use of dwellings for business uses that would detract from the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. It is also intended to allow the use of detached dwellings for limited home business uses, subject to standards that will prevent nuisances and maintain the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(Code 2004, § 152.145; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-202. - Applicability. 
This section shall apply only in residential areas as follows: 
(1)  This section shall apply only within an area or where there is an urban or suburban pattern of land subdivision into lots, each of which has an area of one acre or less or which lots in the subdivision average one acre or less, and which are designed primarily for construction of one detached dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall apply only in the areas of the city where the residence and/or lot in question is bounded on two or more sides by lots containing a detached single-family dwelling or a vacant lot platted as a part of the same subdivision. For purposes of this section, the term "bounded" means contiguous and abutting; or any lot across a road right-of-way within the same or similar land subdivision. 
(Code 2004, § 152.146; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-203. - General provisions. 
Home business uses may be established in a dwelling as more specifically provided in this article. No more than one home business use shall be permitted within any single dwelling or on any one lot. No lot within an area to which this article applies shall be used in violation of this article. Uses that do not qualify as a permitted home business use shall be prohibited in the area to which this article applies. It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain any use or activity that is specifically enumerated as a prohibited use or activity by this article, within the area or areas to which this article applies. 
(Code 2004, § 152.147; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-204. - Land use permit required. 
No use or activity shall commence as a home business within the area to which this article applies, without first securing a land use permit. Failure to meet one or more of these regulations at any time shall be unlawful and grounds for immediate revocation of a land use permit for said use. 
(Code 2004, § 152.148; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-205. - Business registration required. 
No use or activity shall commence as a home business without maintaining a current business tax certificate and paying all occupational taxes and regulatory licenses fees as required by law. Failure to meet one or more of these regulations at any time shall be unlawful and grounds for immediate revocation of business registration. 
(Code 2004, § 152.149; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-206. - Uses and activities permitted. 
The following businesses, uses, and activities shall be permitted in the area or areas to which this article applies: 
(1)  Home offices for architects, engineers, lawyers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers, ministers, rabbis, priests, salesmen, sales representatives, manufacturing representatives, home builders, home repair contractors, trash haulers and similar occupations. 
(2)  Artists, sculptors, authors, photographers and composers. 
(3)  Computer programming and data processing. 
(4)  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware and the like), provided parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders shall not be held more than once a month, shall be limited to ten customers and shall be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
(6)  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, woodworking, ceramics (with a kiln up to six cubic feet) and similar activities, provided that no machinery or equipment shall be used or employed other than that which would customarily be found in the home, including machinery or equipment that would ordinarily be employed in connection with a hobby or a vocation not conducted for gain or profit. 
(7)  Mail order, not including retail sales from site. 
(8)  Music and art teachers or other tutoring services. 
(9)  Telephone answering. 
(10)  Washing and ironing. 
(11)  Work at home activities where employees of a business, located at another location, perform work for the business in their own residence, provided all physical contact between the business and the employee occurs at the place of business and not the residence, other than the initial installation of any equipment or other work facilities. The work activities of the employee shall conform with all other requirements of this section. 
(12)  Other uses and activities similar to those listed in this section as determined by the planning commission. 
(13)  Beautician/barber with one chair and one sink. Must be owner of residence. 
(14)  Internet-based business where no foot or vehicle traffic is required. 
(Code 2004, § 152.150; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 454, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 108-207. - Uses and activities prohibited. 
This section shall not be considered inclusive of all the types of businesses, uses, and activities prohibited by this article. The following businesses, uses and activities shall be prohibited in the area or areas to which this article applies: 
(1)  Kennels. 
(2)  Stables. 
(3)  Veterinarian clinics. 
(4)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(5)  Restaurants, clubs and drinking establishments. 
(6)  Motor vehicle repair or small engine repair. 
(7)  Funeral parlors. 
(8)  Retail sales of goods not made on the premises. 
(9)  Adult uses. 
(Code 2004, § 152.151; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-208. - Use of dwelling and physical limitations. 
All activities in connection with the home occupation shall take place within the principal building on the lot. The gross floor area of a dwelling unit devoted to a home business use shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. 
(Code 2004, § 152.152; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-209. - Vehicles and parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to routinely park any marked business vehicles on the street or in driveways in public view in connection with the home business use. Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be visible in connection with the conduct of the home business use. No more than one commercial vehicle, not exceeding one-ton capacity and two axles, may be stored on the premises, and it must be parked inside an enclosed garage or otherwise completely concealed from view when not in use. 
(b)  Incoming vehicles related to the home business use shall at all times be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
(Code 2004, § 152.153; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-210. - Equipment; nuisances. 
No mechanical equipment shall be installed specifically for use as a home business or used except such as is normally used for domestic purposes. No home business use shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance. No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. Home business uses must exclude the use of machinery or equipment that emits sound (such as saws, drills and the like) that are detectable beyond the property. Chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment and which is used primarily for commercial purposes shall not be permitted. 
(Code 2004, § 152.154; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-211. - Visitations. 
No more than two clients or patrons are allowed on the premises at the same time in conjunction with a home business use, except for persons in care at a family daycare home, where no more than six clients are allowed. Instruction in music, dance, arts, and crafts, and similar subjects shall be limited to one student at a time. In no event shall visitations or any other vehicle trip associated with said home business use be permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 2004, § 152.155; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-212. - Display and stock-in-trade. 
There shall be no display and no visible stock-in-trade on the premises in connection with a home business use. No stock-in-trade shall be sold on the premises except those made on the premises, and such sales shall be infrequent and incidental. Storage devoted to a home business shall be limited in size to no more than 600 square feet of area and shall be counted as part of the total size limits established by this article for home business uses. 
(Code 2004, § 152.156; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-213. - Employees. 
Only occupants of the dwelling and one additional full-time employee or two part-time employees shall be authorized to work on the premises in connection with a home business use. 
(Code 2004, § 152.157; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-214. - Signs. 
One freestanding or attached professional sign not more than two square feet in area identifying the home business use is permitted, in accordance with sections 108-239 through 108-244. 
(Code 2004, § 152.158; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-215. - Administration. 
(a)  A home business use approved under this section shall only apply to the approved location of the business and to the business owner applying for the use. 
(b)  If a home business use is denied under this section, the applicant may apply for a conditional use with the planning and zoning commission pursuant to sections 108-400 through 108-403. 
(Code 2004, § 152.159; Ord. No. 454, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 108-216—108-238. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 108-239. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The city finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of their idea or identification of their premises. 
(2)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs throughout the city is necessary to protect the public safety, to ensure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the citizens of the city. 
(3)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type of signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings or facilities, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The city finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a proprietary purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefitting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(4)  The city finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Signs at the entrances to subdivisions or major developments favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this article, the provisions of this article are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(5)  In considering the appropriate level of sign regulation for the city, the city council has considered planning studies, reports, news articles and related information from a variety of sources. The city finds that advances in technology utilizing LED components results in signs brighter in appearance for LED signs than for signs not utilizing LED technology. While exact measurements have not been determined, some of the explanation for the additional brightness by LED signs is that the field of light projection is diametrically opposed to that of standard signs. Standard sign lighting, whether ground-mounted or platform-mounted, is directed at the sign itself, leaving very little light emission elsewhere; whereas, the LED sign faces the road system providing a brighter, more readable sign. Studies, particularly during non-daylight hours, demonstrate that attention given by drivers to such signs is longer than attention given to non-LED signs. These findings have been reported by such diverse agencies as the Virginia Tech Transportation Institute in its March 22, 2007, report on Driving Performance and Digital Billboards and the Wisconsin Dept. of Transportation in its December 1994 Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study. As a result of these and other studies pertaining to sign research and information, a compilation of 16 studies and reports, the city has determined that use of LED technology on signage in the city results in potential driver distractions and competing traffic interferences. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to permit signs that will not endanger public safety, confuse, mislead, or obstruct vision, or otherwise adversely impact the public health, safety, morality or welfare of the community; to regulate signs to protect and enhance the significant scenic, natural and visual assets of the community and its gateways and corridors; to create orderly and uncluttered zoning districts and corridors; and to otherwise support and complement the objectives in this article. 
(Code 2004, § 152.165; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 108-240. - Permitting requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. Unless specifically exempted by the express terms of this article, any person seeking to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, or convert any sign or sign structure in the city shall first obtain a permit for such sign or sign structure. 
(b)  Signs exempt from permit requirement. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this article but shall adhere to all dimensional and physical standards: 
(1)  Flags; 
(2)  Address numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location, not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(3)  Official signs meeting the standards of this article or the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
(4)  A-frame signs in the B-1 zoning district; 
(5)  Standard informational signs; and 
(6)  Temporary window signs and window signs measuring less than one square foot in sign area. 
(c)  Permit procedures. To obtain a sign permit, a complete permit application shall be filed with the city at the office of the community development director and a permit fee, as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council, shall be paid at the time of submission of this application. A permit application is not complete unless and until the permit fee is paid. 
(1)  Application contents. Each application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  The type of the sign and all other information required to establish compliance of the proposed sign with this article; 
b.  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all existing signs and sign structures on the lot as well as all proposed signs to be located on the lot; 
c.  A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems for each proposed sign; 
d.  An estimated cost of construction for each proposed sign; 
e.  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address; 
f.  The name, address, and contact information of the owner of the real property upon which the sign is to be located; 
g.  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size, and height of the sign to be placed on the property; 
h.  The address, parcel number, and lot size of the subject property; 
i.  The zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
j.  An agreement wherein the applicant shall indemnify the city against all damages, demands or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure; and 
k.  Any other information as may be reasonably required by the community development director, planning commission, or mayor and council to determine compliance with the standards of these regulations. 
(2)  Time for decision. Upon the submission of a complete permit application and payment of the required permit fee by the applicant, the community development director or his designee shall have 30 business days to issue a decision granting or denying a permit. The 30-day period shall not begin to run until a complete sign permit application is received by the community development director. At or before expiration of the 30th business day following receipt of the application, the community development director or his designee shall either grant or deny the requested permit. If a decision is not made on or before expiration of the 30-day period then the requested permit shall be deemed granted. 
(3)  Standard for permit decision. Where a permit application and accompanying documentation show that the desired sign will conform to all of the requirements of this article as well as all other pertinent laws and ordinances regulating signage, then a permit shall be granted. Where a permit application is incomplete, contains a false material statement or omission, or requests a sign that does not comply with the applicable requirements of this article or any other pertinent laws and ordinances regulating signage, the permit shall be denied. 
(4)  Notice of decision. The community development director or his designee shall provide the applicant with written notice of his decision by hand delivery or by mailing such notice to the applicant's address on or before the 30th business day following the community development director 's receipt of the applicant's complete permit application and permit fee. If the permit is denied, the written notice shall set forth the reasons for denial. 
(5)  Permit expiration. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been substantially completed (60 percent completion from a cost analysis) within six months of issuance. No refunds shall be made for a permit once approved. If a permit expires and later the permittee desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new permit application for the sign must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(6)  Resubmission of rejected permit application. A rejected application later resubmitted in conformity with this article shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the original submission date. The resubmitted application will be considered as a new application and is subject to all application requirements and fees. An application which is resubmitted shall meet all the standards for an original application. 
(d)  Revocation of permit. In the event the city determines that an existing sign has been erected in violation of the requirements of this article or any other laws and ordinances regulating signage, exists in violation of standards not otherwise grandfathered, or that the sign was issued a permit on the basis of an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement or omission, the community development director or his designee shall provide written notice of revocation to the permittee in the same manner as a notice of denial. The notice shall provide a time, not sooner than ten business days nor later than 30 business days from the date of the notice, for the applicant to appear before the community development director and provide evidence as to why the sign permit should not be revoked. A decision by the c community development director to uphold the revocation shall be reduced to writing and served on the permit holder no later than ten days from the date of hearing. 
(e)  Appeals. In the event a permit application is denied or revoked, the applicant or permittee may appeal the denial or revocation to the board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director no later than ten business days after the denial or revocation. The board of appeals shall hear the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least six days after the notice of appeal is received. The appellant may consent to a continued date of hearing, provided the hearing shall be held no later than 45 days from the date of appeal. A final written decision on an appeal shall be rendered by the board of appeals no more than 30 days from the date such appeal was heard. The decision shall be served on the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. If a decision is not rendered by the board of appeals within the 30-day period, then the permit shall be deemed granted. If the applicant or permittee is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of appeals on appeal, then such person may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Code 2004, § 152.166; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 108-241. - General sign regulations. 
(a)  Non-commercial speech protected. Any sign within the city which is allowable under this article may include, wholly or partially, any non-commercial message, at the discretion of the sign owner, provided such message is not obscene. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in the city: 
(1)  Animated signs; 
(2)  Signs emitting an audible sound; 
(3)  LED signs with a sign face over 30 square feet; 
(4)  Obscene signs; 
(5)  Portable signs, except A-frame signs in the B-1 zoning district; 
(6)  Spectacular signs; 
(7)  Roof signs and signs that extend vertically above any portion of a roof or parapet of the applicable wall or that prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; 
(8)  Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "warning," or similar words in such a manner as to resemble official traffic control signs; 
(9)  Signs in the public right-of-way or on public property, other than official signs meeting the standards of this article or the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
(10)  Signs that have reflective elements or luminous or glow-in-the-dark paint; 
(11)  Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, utility poles, rocks, or other similar structures or natural features; 
(12)  Signs which depict nudity or sexual conduct as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-52; 
(13)  Signs posted or placed on any property belonging to another without the express written consent of the owner thereof; 
(14)  Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state, or local law; 
(15)  Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, or containing or exhibiting broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters; 
(16)  Tri-vision signs; and 
(17)  Stanchion signs. 
(c)  Computation of display area. 
(1)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c)(2) and (3) of this section, the display area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those parts contained within the polygon that delimits the sign face. 
(2)  Multi-faced signs. For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are back-to-back, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
(3)  Wall signs. If polygons established around wall signs located on the same street-oriented wall are within 24 inches or less of one another, then the area of the sign shall be measured within one continuous polygon. 
(d)  Computation of sign height. The height shall be measured from the average ground level beneath the sign to the highest point. The ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction and any earth disturbance at the site. This prior ground level shall be established by a reliable source, including without limitation, existing topographic maps, aerial photographs, photographs of the site, or affidavits of people who are personally familiar with the site. No person shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the base of the sign. 
(e)  Sign location. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to block or prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or ventilation opening; 
(2)  No sign or any part thereof, except official signs meeting the requirements of this article, shall be located in any public right-of-way or on public property; 
(3)  No sign may be located any closer than 15 feet to an intersection as measured from the nearest point of intersection of the two rights-of-way; and 
(4)  Unless a different setback is specified elsewhere in this article, in a zoning overlay district, or in the conditions of zoning, all signs and all parts of signs shall be set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way, or 20 feet from the edge of pavement if a private street, and no sign shall project over the right-of-way or a private street. 
(f)  Number of display surfaces. Freestanding signs shall not have more than two display surfaces. 
(g)  Changeable copy signs. Unless otherwise specified in the article, changeable copy shall be permitted in conjunction with freestanding signs, provided that: 
(1)  The changeable copy portion of a sign shall not simulate movement, flash, fade or scroll, but shall remain constant in lighting, color, and all other changeable variables allowed by technology; 
(2)  The changeable copy portion of a sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the overall display area, or 30 square feet, whichever is less; and 
(3)  The changeable copy portion of the sign may not change more than twice per minute. 
(h)  Sign illumination. 
(1)  Types of illumination permitted. 
a.  Indirect illumination. Indirect illumination of signs is permitted in any non-residential district provided that such signs shall have concealed wiring and controls and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
b.  Direct illumination. Direct illumination of signs is limited to the B-3 and I-1 districts. Internally channeled or reverse-channeled letters are permitted only in instances of wall signs affixed to buildings with a front setback of more than 250 feet. 
c.  Dimming and hours of illumination. LED and other electronic signs may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.30 footcandles (under measurement conditions) above ambient light levels as measured at the following distances: 

 
d.  The owner of all LED and other electronic signs shall arrange for an annual certification of the light intensity showing compliance by an independent electrical engineer and provide said certification to the city. 
(2)  Operation when business open. No sign shall be illuminated, directly or indirectly, between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the premises on which the sign is located is open for business. 
(3)  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not light adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 50 feet of any residential district or dwelling. 
(4)  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(5)  Traffic control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(6)  Neon tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. 
(i)  Construction standards and maintenance. 
(1)  All signs permitted under this article shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable building and electrical codes of the city. All building and electrical permits required for the erection, modification, or conversion of any sign must be obtained from the city in addition to a sign permit. 
(2)  Signs and all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be constructed of durable materials and kept in good repair. Unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, exposed materials shall be given a protective coating as reasonably necessary. 
(3)  No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
(4)  The area immediately surrounding all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
(j)  Identification of signs. Every sign for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee and shall have the number of the permit affixed on the framework of the sign in the lower right hand area so that it is easily seen. 
(Code 2004, § 152.167; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 108-242. - Signs permitted in specific zoning districts. 
(a)  Zoning districts. All signs erected in the city shall meet the physical standards of this article. The following standards shall govern signs in each specific zoning district in the city: 
(1)  A-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, and R-3 districts. 
a.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted to be displayed per lot. Flags shall not exceed 24 square feet in display area and shall be flown from either a placard attached to the wall of the structure or from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 25 feet. 
b.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One ground sign with a maximum display area of six square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per lot per residential use. 
2.  One ground sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per lot occupied by a non-residential use or at the entrance to any platted single-family residential subdivision or multifamily development; provided that the size limit specified by section 108-214 shall apply to all home business signs. 
c.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
d.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection, non-residential uses within these districts that are developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
e.  Wall signs. Two wall signs shall be permitted per building on lots occupied by a non-residential use. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed five percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the surface of the wall on which they are erected. 
f.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(2)  P-1 district. 
a.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted to be displayed per lot. Flags shall not exceed 24 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 25 feet. 
b.  Freestanding signs. One ground sign with a maximum display area of 48 square feet and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per lot occupied by a non-residential use. The sign shall be set back at least five feet from the public right-of-way. 
c.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
d.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection: 
1.  One temporary sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. The sign shall be set back at least five feet from the public right-of-way. 
2.  Developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. The sign shall be set back at least five feet from the public right-of-way. 
e.  Wall signs. Two wall signs shall be permitted per building on lots occupied by a non-residential use. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed five percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the surface of the wall on which they are erected. 
f.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(3)  B-1 and B-2 districts. 
a.  Freestanding signs. One ground sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and a height of no more than four feet shall be permitted per lot. Ground signs shall be set back at least five feet from the public right-of-way. 
b.  A-frame signs. One A-frame sign with a maximum display area of four square feet and a height of no more than four feet may be displayed per business in a B-1 zoning district. A-frame signs shall be located on the sidewalk in immediate proximity to the entrance of the business and shall be placed in such a manner as to not obstruct pedestrian traffic. 
c.  Directional signs. Four directional signs with a maximum display area of four square feet and height of no more than three feet shall be permitted per lot. 
d.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted to be displayed per lot. Flags shall not exceed 60 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 40 feet. 
e.  Projecting signs. One projecting sign with a maximum display area of 12 square feet and extending no more than five feet from the wall to which it is attached is permitted per business on a lot. Projecting signs shall be located immediately above the entrance to the business. 
f.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign set back at least five feet from the public right-of-way, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
g.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this article: 
1.  Two temporary signs with a maximum display area of 32 square feet each and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a period of consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
2.  One additional banner with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
3.  Developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
h.  Wall signs. Two wall signs are permitted per business on a lot. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed ten percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the wall on which they are erected. 
i.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(4)  B-3 districts. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One ground sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per driveway entrance to a lot. If a lot has more than one driveway entrance, no more than two freestanding signs shall be permitted. 
2.  One additional ground sign with a maximum display area of 48 square feet and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per lot. 
3.  If a lot contains a drive-in or drive-thru, then one additional ground sign with a maximum display area of 50 square feet and height of no more than seven feet shall be permitted. The sign shall be oriented toward the drive-in or drive-thru lane and shall be located within a side or rear yard. 
b.  Directional signs. Four directional signs with a maximum display area of four square feet and height of no more than three feet shall be permitted per lot. In addition, two directional signs with a maximum display area of 12 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per lot. 
c.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted to be displayed per lot. Flags shall not exceed 60 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 40 feet. 
d.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
e.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection: 
1.  Two temporary signs with a maximum display area of 32 square feet each and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
2.  One additional banner with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
3.  Developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
f.  Wall signs. Two wall signs are permitted per business on a lot. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed ten percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the wall on which they are erected. 
g.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(5)  I-1 districts. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One ground sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per driveway. If a lot has more than one driveway, no more than two freestanding signs shall be permitted. 
2.  One additional ground sign with a maximum display area of 48 square feet and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per lot. 
b.  Directional signs. Four directional signs with a maximum display area of four square feet and height of no more than three feet shall be permitted per lot. In addition, two directional signs with a maximum display area of 12 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per lot. 
c.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted per lot. Flags shall not exceed 60 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 40 feet. 
d.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
e.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection: 
1.  Two temporary signs with a maximum display area of 32 square feet each and height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
2.  One additional banner with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business on a lot for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
3.  Developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
f.  Wall signs. Two wall signs are permitted per business on a lot. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed ten percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the wall on which they are erected. 
g.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(6)  Planned unit development (PUD) districts. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Two ground signs with a maximum display area of 20 square feet each and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per development. 
2.  In addition, one ground sign with a maximum display area of 20 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted on each side of the entrance to a development. 
b.  Directional signs. Four directional signs with a maximum display area of four square feet and height of no more than three feet shall be permitted per lot. 
c.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted to be displayed per lot. Flags on lots occupied by residential uses shall exceed 24 square feet in display area and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is higher than 25 feet. Flags on lots occupied by non-residential uses shall not exceed 60 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 40 feet. 
d.  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
e.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection: 
1.  Two temporary signs with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business on a lot occupied by a non-residential use for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
2.  One additional banner with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business on a lot occupied by a non-residential use for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per year. 
3.  Developed properties with vacant lots, units, and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
f.  Wall signs. One wall sign is permitted per building on a lot occupied by a commercial or institutional use. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed ten percent of the area of the wall on which they are erected. Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the wall on which they are erected. 
g.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted for residential units. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(7)  Planned centers in all zoning districts. The following standards shall govern signs in planned centers in all zoning districts: 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One ground sign per street frontage for the entire planned center, not to exceed two per planned center. A ground sign shall not exceed 48 square feet in display area nor ten feet in height. 
2.  If a business in a planned center has more than one street frontage, one additional ground sign with a maximum display area of 48 square feet and a height of no more than ten feet shall be permitted per street frontage. 
b.  Directional signs. Four directional signs with a maximum display area of four square feet and height of no more than three feet shall be permitted per planned center. In addition, two directional signs with a maximum display area of 12 square feet and height of no more than six feet shall be permitted per planned center. 
c.  Flags. Two flags shall be permitted per planned center. Flags shall not exceed 60 square feet in display area and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is no higher than 40 feet. 
d.  Standard informational signs. Each business or tenant may display one standard informational sign, except that during a political election, between the date of qualification and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, each lot may display an unlimited number of standard informational signs. 
e.  Temporary signs. In addition to all other signs permitted by this subsection: 
1.  Two temporary signs with a maximum display area of 32 square feet each shall be permitted per business in a planned center for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per calendar year. 
2.  One additional banner with a maximum display area of 32 square feet shall be permitted per business in a planned center for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days no more than four times per year. 
3.  Planned centers with vacant units and/or tenant spaces shall be entitled to one temporary sign per access-providing street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall have a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 90 days and for no more than two such periods per calendar year. 
f.  Wall signs. One wall sign per business in a planned center. Wall signs shall have a maximum display area not to exceed five percent of the area of the front wall of the building and shall not project more than six inches from the wall. For an anchor establishment in a planned center, an additional four signs are permitted. 
g.  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the window area. 
(b)  Conflicts with historic districts and zoning overlay districts. To the extent that any regulations governing any historic district or zoning overlay district now existing or later enacted conflict with this article, the most restrictive provisions shall control. 
(Code 2004, § 152.168; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 108-243. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs may remain in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or renders it dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs or a material change is required to restore the sign, provided that such damage was not the result of an act of God or by other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted provided that said replacement does not constitute a material change to the sign. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
(c)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted; provided however, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the standards of this article. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by an act of God or by other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this division within 60 days of when the initial damage occurred; provided that the repairs shall adhere to the original design and shall not prolong the natural life of the sign as it existed before being damaged by an act of God or other circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the sign. 
(Code 2004, § 152.169; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 108-244. - Violations, inspections, and removal. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, or convert any sign which does not comply with the standards or requirements of this article, except to render the sign conforming in all respects with the standards of this article. 
(2)  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. 
(b)  Inspections. The community development director shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and nonconforming sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this article or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the sign owner. 
(c)  Removal procedure. 
(1)  The community development director shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this article. The community development director shall prepare a written notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within 30 days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  All removal notices shall be sent by certified mail and first class mail. Any time periods provided in this subsection shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail, or if the first class mail is not returned, three days after mailing. 
(3)  The removal notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign and the occupant of the property. If any of such persons is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last-known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
(4)  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the community development director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days after receipt of notice. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the community development director may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. Additionally, signs in the public right-of-way or on public property may be removed without notice at any time. 
(6)  Any sign removed by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal. 
(7)  When it is determined by the community development director that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with a sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served. In this emergency situation, the community development director or his designee shall document the imminent danger and attempt to contact the sign owner, and may correct the danger, all costs being charged to the sign owner and property owner. 
(8)  If it shall be necessary for the community development director to remove a sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, he may sell the same at private or public sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Where the proceeds derived from such a sale are less than the cost of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectible in the same manner as city property taxes. 
(Code 2004, § 152.170; Ord. No. 456, 9-16-2013) 
Secs. 108-245—108-266. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 108-267. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this article or his successors in title thereto does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the required dimensions in this article, such lot may be used as a building site provided that yards are established in accordance with the provisions of this article as applied to the district where the lot is located. 
(Code 2004, § 152.186; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-268. - Front yard setback for dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirements of this article for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the front yard setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. 
(Code 2004, § 152.187; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-269. - Height limits. 
The height limits of the article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, masts, radio and television towers and aerials, and similar structures not intended for human occupancy. 
(Code 2004, § 152.188; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-270. - Group development. 
A group project (housing, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religions, civic) of two or more buildings to be constructed on a parcel of at least two acres in area which will not be subdivided into customary lots and streets may be constructed, provided that: 
(1)  Uses shall be limited to those permitted within the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Density and building coverage requirements of the district are met. 
(3)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall be adequate to meet all setback and yard requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(4)  There shall be a ten-foot planted buffer strip where such group developments abut a residential district. 
(Code 2004, § 152.189; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-271. - Facades. 
(a)  All commercial, industrial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings, shall be constructed of brick, stucco or textured masonry block. The exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall not be used on the exterior of commercial, industrial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings. 
(b)  Under this article, any addition or expansion that is 25 percent or less does not fall under the definition of new structures. 
(c)  Any addition or expansion that is 25 percent or less to an existing building, can be of materials that is of the same grade currently on the existing facade. Only once such exception for a building expansion of 25 percent shall be permitted per year. The community development director may issue permits for expansion of 25 percent or less to an existing building. 
(d)  The proposed design for all commercial, industrial, institutional buildings (churches, schools and the like) and all non-residential buildings, to include all incidental and accessory buildings, shall be submitted for review and approval to the community development director and the city architect, and the design shall comply with the applicable building regulations and design guidelines as adopted by the city council. A design review fee will be charged to the developer/property owner. 
(Code 2004, § 152.190; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 418, 10-20-2008; Am. Ord. No. 433, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 108-272. - Commercial buffer. 
All commercial development which abuts a residential district shall have a 20-foot plated buffer strip between it and the residential property. A six- to eight-foot fence must be installed on rear buffer. 
(Code 2004, § 152.191; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-273. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of this article may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this article except that the nonconforming structures or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Re-established after discontinuance for one year; 
(3)  Extended except in conformity with this article; 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this article. 
(Code 2004, § 152.192; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-274. - Discontinuance of open-air uses. 
All nonconforming uses not contained on within a building except those which are incidental and necessary to activities within a building shall be discontinued within three years from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which of this article is derived or amendment thereto. Nonconforming uses to be discontinued include, but are not limited to, outdoor sales area, automobile parking lots, trailer courts, junkyards, storage yards, outdoor advertising signs, and similar uses, including small buildings incidental to such uses. 
(Code 2004, § 152.193; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-275. - Off-street automobile parking. 
(a)  Off-street parking required. No building hereinafter shall be erected, nor any of the following uses shall be established, nor any principal building enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, and/or floor area unless the minimum number of parking spaces as specified below are provided. Each parking space shall be at least 200 square feet with a minimum width of no less than ten feet, shall have access for vehicles to a private street, and shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface. Handicap spaces shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Spaces for single-family residential lots are exempt from material requirements. Parking lots for more than five vehicles shall provide sufficient turning space to prevent cars from backing into the street. 
(1)  Automobile repair garages. One space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(2)  Funeral parlors. One space for each 300 square feet of floor space. 
(3)  Gasoline filling stations. Ten spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
(4)  Hospitals and nursing homes. One space for each five beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees including nurses. 
(5)  Hotels. One space for each guest room available for rent. 
(6)  Industrial establishments. One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(7)  Lodges and clubs. One space for each eight members. 
(8)  Offices. One space for each 300 square feet of floor space. 
(9)  Places of amusement or public assembly without fixed seats. One space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use. 
(10)  Places of amusement or public assembly with fixed seats. One space for each four seats in the main assembly hall. 
(11)  Residential. Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(12)  Restaurants. One space for each four chairs, plus one space for each four employees. 
(13)  Retail business. One space for each 200 square feet of sales area. 
(14)  Boardinghouses and roominghouses. One space for each guest room. 
(15)  Schools. One space for each 30 pupils in primary schools, one space for each four students in high school and one space for each student in higher education, plus an additional space for each employee. 
(16)  Tourist courts and motels. One space for each accommodation. 
(17)  Manufactured housing parks. One space for each trailer. 
(18)  Wholesale business. One space for each 300 square feet. 
(b)  Pervious surface requirements. The community development director may administratively approve an alternative permanent surface material or a substitute for concrete curbs, or both, which best fits the needs of the parking application. The department, in making such a determination, shall find that: 
(1)  The alternative surface will not degrade the public street; 
(2)  The alternative surface will adequately withstand the anticipated parking demand; and 
(3)  The alternative surface will reduce the impervious surface area of the parcel or parking lot. 
(c)  Pervious surface treatment applied. The following provisions apply to parking areas where a pervious surface treatment is applied to the area dedicated to off-street automobile parking spaces and drive aisles: 
(1)  Parking lot areas eligible for pervious or permeable surfaces include parking spaces and access aisles but not driveways, parking lot perimeter roads or heavily used parking access drives. The design engineer shall be required to demonstrate how the surface design will be satisfactory for the intended use. 
(2)  Pervious surfaces include pervious concrete and asphalt, pervious pavers and turf block or other surface treatment approved by the department. Loose gravel, crusher run, sand or native soils are not permitted and may not be approved. 
(3)  The stormwater reductions that result from permeable pavement may be considered in any stormwater management plans. 
(d)  Temporary outdoor display. There may be placed in off-street parking areas, temporary outdoor displays and sales of products which are related to the primary business use, such as shrubs, plants, flowers, seasonal greenery, Christmas trees, and the like, following administrative review by the department. Temporary outdoor displays shall not exceed 30 days within a three-month period. To obtain approval for a temporary outdoor display: 
(1)  The owner of the property or an agent of such owner shall submit a plan and description of the merchandise to be displayed on a form provided by the department. 
(2)  The owner or the owner's agent must demonstrate that the display will be safe, stable, and visually appealing. 
(3)  The owner or the owner's agent must demonstrate that the required numbers of parking spaces for land uses as specified in this section are provided. 
(Code 2004, § 152.194; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 476, 12-22-2014) 
Sec. 108-276. - Location on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot where the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided that such property lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. The automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 2004, § 152.195; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-277. - Extension of parking space in residential districts. 
Required parking spaces may extend up to 100 feet into a residential district provided that the parking space adjoins a commercial or industrial district and has its only access on the same street as the property for which it serves and is separated from abutting residences by a planted buffer strip at least 20 feet wide. 
(Code 2004, § 152.196; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-278. - Off-street loading and uploading spaces. 
On every lot on which a business, trade or industry is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley. 
(1)  Retail business. Ten percent of the floor area. 
(2)  Wholesale and industrial. Five percent of the floor area. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks that will be stored and loading or unloading at any one time. 
(Code 2004, § 152.197; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-279. - Pending application for building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof, for which a building permit has been granted prior to the adoption of this article, provided construction shall start within 60 days after the granting of such permit. 
(Code 2004, § 152.198; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-280. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the B-1 Downtown Business District, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 12 feet shall be permitted within 60 feet of the intersection of the centerlines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(Code 2004, § 152.199; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Secs. 108-281—108-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-309. - Planning commission meetings. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  A meeting of the planning commission shall be held at such time as called upon at least 24 hours' notice by the chairperson, or in his absence by the vice-chairperson, as necessary to consider any petition to request a change in zoning, any petition for a conditional use permit, or as otherwise necessary to conduct the work of the commission. The meeting shall be at the public safety building of the city or in any other designated place, provided the location is specified in all notices required by law. Business may be conducted provided there is a quorum of the commission present. A quorum shall consist of any three of the five members, and the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the quorum shall be required to effect any action by the commission. 
(2)  In the event there is not a quorum of the commission present at a public hearing to consider a petition to request a change in zoning, minutes of the hearing shall be prepared and distributed to the commission members prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which action on the request shall be taken. In the event the commission should fail to meet, or fail to have a quorum such that action could be taken, within 30 days of such hearing, the minutes of such hearing shall be presented to the next succeeding meeting of the city council. 
(b)  Procedures for planning commission meeting. All planning commission meetings shall generally be conducted in accordance with the following proposed procedures whenever a rezoning request is under consideration: 
(1)  The application will be read. 
(2)  The community development director will present the background for the request. 
(3)  The applicant will be asked to make his presentation. (He should be told that he will have an opportunity to rebut comments in opposition to their application from others present.) 
(4)  Commission members will question the applicant on the request. 
(5)  Comments in support of the change will be invited from the public. 
(6)  Comments in opposition to the change will be invited from the public. 
(7)  The applicant will be allowed to rebut negative comments. Recommendations (if any) from the community development director will be read or presented. 
(8)  All public comments having been heard, that portion of the hearing will be closed, and the commission members will discuss the request among themselves. 
(9)  Upon a motion and second by members, the commission will recommend action to be taken on the request. 
(Code 2004, § 152.218; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 480, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 108-310. - Time. 
The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the governing authority within 30 days of the public hearing or the request shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval. 
(Code 2004, § 152.220; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-311. - Presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of all meetings of the planning commission shall be the chairperson of the commission, and in his absence, the vice-chairperson shall preside. 
(Code 2004, § 152.221; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-312. - Meetings deemed public and open. 
Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, but executive sessions may be held upon order of the chairperson or of the commission acting as a body. 
(Code 2004, § 152.222; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-313. - Administration and interpretation. 
It shall be the duty of the duly appointed community development director to administer and interpret this article. To this end, the community development director is authorized to prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and to implement the provisions of this article. The community development director may delegate administrative functions, powers and duties assigned by this article to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. From time to time, it may be beneficial to the city to allow certain minor zoning modifications to regulations to be conducted by the community development director. 
(Code 2004, § 152.256; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 1804, § 152.256, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 108-314. - Appeal of an administrative decision or interpretation. 
Any person who alleges that there has been an error by the community development director in administration or interpretation of this article or in his decision in regards to a minor zoning modification shall have the right to appeal the decision of the community development director to the board of appeals, as more specifically provided in sections 108-377 and 108-378. 
(Code 2004, § 152.257; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Ord. No. 1804, § 152.256, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 108-315. - Procedure for issuance of minor zoning modifications. 
The procedure for granting minor modifications by the community development director shall be the same as the procedure for the granting of variances by the planning commission, except that no notice of a public hearing shall be required for the granting of such minor modification. In the event that there is any dissatisfaction with the community development director's decision, the applicant may appeal using the procedures outlined in sections 108-377 and 108-378. 
(1)  Minor modification requirements. 
a.  No minor modification may be issued if it is not consistent with the following: that there is no change in the approved land use, including the amount and general location thereof, no increase in the number of dwelling units or amount of non-residential floor area, or any associated characteristics of any use. 
b.  Driveways and/or streets do not significantly alter the general distribution of traffic or modify the public or private rights therein. 
c.  There is no change to any condition set forth by the city council in the ordinance which approved the zoning request, such as in a PUD. 
(2)  Application and processing. An applicant seeking a minor modification shall submit the appropriate application to the community development director or his designee. Once the application for a minor modification is reviewed, and the community development director or his designee determines that it is appropriate the application may be acted upon: 
a.  Approve the application as submitted; 
b.  Approve the application with modifications and/or conditions; 
c.  Deny the application and provide the applicant with a written explanation for the denial; or 
d.  Extend the processing period up to 90 days in order to conduct a public hearing if the community development director or his designee determines that new findings warrant public input prior to consideration of the application; provided, however, that if an applicant substantially amends an application after acceptance by the community development director or his designee, the director shall have up to 45 days from the date of such amendment to act on the application as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1804, § 152.256, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 108-316. - Land use permit required. 
Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this article, no building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a land use permit issued by the community development director. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, without a land use permit for such use or occupancy. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this article, no land use activity including land disturbance shall be initiated without a land use permit, and except in conformity with said land use permit. It shall be unlawful to erect, move, add to, structurally alter any building or structure, use or occupy or permit the use of any occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, or initiate any land use activity that is in violation of an approved land use permit. 
(Code 2004, § 152.258; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-317. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce this article and to bring to the attention of the city manager any violations or lack of compliance therewith. The community development director may delegate enforcement functions, powers, and duties assigned by this article to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(Code 2004, § 152.259; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-318. - Refusal of permits or permissions. 
The community development director is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this article or other ordinances of the city where the applicant, applicant's business, or agent has failed or refused to comply with this article. 
(Code 2004, § 152.260; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-319. - Stop-work order. 
The community development director is hereby authorized to issue written stop-work and cease and desist orders for any activity that fails to comply with the provisions of this article. Such stop-work or cease and desist orders may be lifted at such time as the community development director is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of this article. Nothing shall prevent the community development director from reissuing stop-work and cease and desist orders where warranted. 
(Code 2004, § 152.261; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-320. - Injunction. 
If any land is used, or building, structure, or other activity is established or maintained in violation of this article, the community development director is authorized to and may institute, in addition to other remedies, an injunction or undertake other appropriate action to cause the violation to cease or to be corrected. 
(Code 2004, § 152.262; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-321. - Complaints. 
Whenever a violation of this article occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state clearly and fully the causes and bases of the complaint and shall be filed with the community development director. The community development director shall record properly such complaint, investigate, and take action thereon as may be appropriate to enforce this article. 
(Code 2004, § 152.263; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-322. - Time limits and extensions. 
(a)  The PUD, MUD and conservation zoning approval referred herein as PUD, and the approval of any associated preliminary plat or other land division approval, shall be valid for four years from the day it is approved by the city council. Construction on any and all phases of a PUD must be complete for final PUD approval within four years of the preliminary PUD approval; provided, that there may be a two-year extension as provided herein. Failure to comply with these provisions could result in a revocation of the PUD zoning and designation. 
(b)  A PUD and any associated preliminary plat or other land division, pursuant to this section, may be extended for a maximum of two years after the initial four year time limit; provided, that: 
(1)  A written request for extension (application) has been received at least 60 days prior to the date of expiration; and 
(2)  The applicant demonstrates that extraordinary and unforeseen circumstances have precluded compliance with the four-year time limit and that the extension would result in a successful completion of the project. The extension application fee, as established by the mayor and council and provided in the city fee schedule, and may be levied against dwelling units or lots depending on the project, 
(3)  The determination shall be made by the planning commission upon recommendation from the community development director. Such determination shall me made within 60 days of receiving the application. 
(4)  If the planning commission determines that the extension should not be granted, the applicant shall have the ability to appeal the decision to the city council. If the extension is granted no further action from the council is required. 
(Ord. No. 1807, 5-24-2018) 
Sec. 108-323. - Revocation. 
(a)  If the applicant does not begin and substantially complete the planned unit development, or any phase of the planned unit development, within the initial four years imposed in section 108-321, the community development director shall review the planned unit development and shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission. 
(1)  The approved planned unit development zone and any land development designations such as plats, building permits or approved construction plans shall be revoked. 
(2)  Upon revocation, the land within the planned unit development shall revert back to the previous zoning prior to the PUD approval. 
(3)  There shall be a one-year moratorium after revocation before a new rezoning application will be accepted by the city from the existing owner. A new owner shall have the right to petition anytime within the year. 
(b)  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be presented at the next regular meeting of the city council. The city council shall make the final determination upon whether to grant an extension or approve the revocation. 
(1)  If the extension is granted by the city council the developer shall have two years from the date of the council meeting to substantially complete the project. 
(2)  If the council accepts the recommendation of revocation from the planning commission it shall go into effect immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1807, 5-24-2018) 
Secs. 108-324—108-349. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REZONING PROCEDURE AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 108-350. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this division to mandate the procedures for rezoning and generally amending this division. 
(Code 2004, § 152.215; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-351. - Authority. 
The community development director shall administer this division. 
(Code 2004, § 152.216; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-352. - Procedure for rezoning application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition, with a plat of the property attached thereto, together with payment of the applicable fee to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the community development director. 
(b)  All petitions for rezoning shall include the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the property including the address; 
(2)  A description of the existing use of the structure or property; 
(3)  A description of the proposed use of the structure or property to ensure the petitioner is requesting the proper zoning classification; and 
(4)  The petitioner must disclose any campaign contributions over $250.00 which have been made to any elected official who will consider the rezoning request. The disclosure must be made within ten days after the filing of the rezoning application. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a petition for a change in zoning, the applicant shall within seven days, at his expense, cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the property in question, a sign provided by the community development director. 

 
A petition has been filed requesting that this property be changed from (insert present district name) to (insert district requested). A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time). All those having an interest in this petition should be present.  (Property Owner)  (Address) 
(d)  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days before such public hearing, the community development director shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation of the city. In no event shall a hearing be held less than 15 days after notice is posted on the property in accordance with this division. 
(e)  The public hearing shall be held by the planning commission. 
(Code 2004, § 152.217; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-353. - Relevant factors in rezoning evaluation. 
In the city, the following factors are considered when applying the balancing test which is required to arrive at a rezoning decision. Those factors are as follows: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. Would the requested zoning permit land uses of a similar nature to those uses of similarly situated nearby land? 
(2)  Extent to which property value is diminished by present zoning. How much more would the property be worth if the rezoning request were approved? 
(3)  Extent to which destruction of the property value of the petitioner promotes the health, safety, morality, or general public welfare. How would approval of the request adversely impact the public interest? There may be many valid considerations here depending upon the nature of the request. Among them are: 
a.  Traffic. Potential increase in congestion resulting from approval of the request; 
b.  Diminution of value. Immediate diminution of gradual diminution resulting from deterioration of a neighborhood over a period of time; 
c.  Environmental impact. Potential for generation of noise, air pollution, or deterioration of unique or sensitive environmental conditions. 
(4)  Zoning of the property when purchased. Is the request a result of speculative purchase of the property? 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for the current zoning. Are natural environmental features conducive to the type of development permitted by the present zoning? Are the utilities present for development of the site? Would the topography or other natural environmental characteristics of the site be conducive to development under the present zoning? 
(6)  Length of time the property has been vacant as zoned. Considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
(7)  Conformity. The extent to which rezoning request conforms with the city comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Districts. The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
(9)  Public effects. The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the loan on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets. 
(10)  Boundaries. Whether existing district boundaries are illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions on the property proposed for change. 
(11)  Changing conditions. Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment necessary. 
(12)  Drainage. Whether the proposed change will create a drainage problem. 
(13)  Effects. Whether the proposed change will seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas. 
(14)  Property values. Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in the adjacent area. 
(15)  Adjacent property. Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations. 
(16)  Privilege. Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare. 
(17)  Need for change. Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
(18)  Neighborhood. Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or would adversely affect living conditions in the neighborhood. 
(19)  General. Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. 
(Code 2004, § 152.219; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-354. - Resubmittal of petitions. 
Whenever a petition for change of zoning has been denied, no further petition for change of zoning for the same property for the same classification shall be heard for a period of two years from the date of the first hearing. 
(Code 2004, § 152.223; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-355. - Deadline for withdrawal of petition. 
Any petitioner shall have the right to voluntarily withdraw a petition for change of zoning by 12:00 noon on the date preceding the hearing date without commission approval for resubmission. Any petition withdrawn after this time for any reason must have the consent of the commission by proper resolution before resubmission and advertisement. 
(Code 2004, § 152.224; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-356. - Withdrawal with prejudice. 
The commission at its discretion may allow a petitioner to withdraw a petition without prejudice at the public hearing when unusual circumstances warrant such actions. When this is done no further approval by the commission is required prior to resubmittal. 
(Code 2004, § 152.225; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-357. - Action by city council. 
Following the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall act and either accept, reject or modify the recommendation. Prior to acting, the city council shall do the following: 
(1)  Publish notice in accordance with section 108-352. 
(2)  The city council may consider, in addition to the recommendation of the planning commission, those factors listed in section 108-353, together with any additional information deemed necessary. 
(3)  The presentation of the request shall proceed generally in the same fashion as outlined in section 108-352. 
(Code 2004, § 152.226; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-358. - Text amendments to zoning ordinance. 
(a)  City council. The city council may from time to time by ordinance amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations herein or subsequently established. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the city council, the planning and zoning commission or by a person owning or having an interest in property in the city. A person owning or having an interest in property in the city, after filing an application with the planning and zoning commission, shall appear before the commission at a public hearing to present their proposal. If the council initiates an amendment, its proposal shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission for the commission's report and recommendation. If the planning and zoning commission initiates an amendment, the planning and zoning department shall, after sufficient time to compile data, present their report and recommendation to the commission. 
(c)  Application for amendment. Any person owning or having an interest in property or the planning and zoning commission may file an application for a text amendment with the planning commission upon such forms as the commission may specify by rule. The application for amendment shall contain the information listed in section 108-352 and the procedure for a text amendment shall follow the regulations listed in section 108-352. 
(Code 2004, § 152.227; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 471, 9-22-2014) 
Sec. 108-359. - Amendments to official zoning map. 
(a)  City council. The city council may from time to time by ordinance amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the official zoning map. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the council, the planning and zoning commission or by a person owning or having an interest in property in the city. If the council initiates an amendment, its proposal shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission for the commission's report and recommendation. 
(c)  Application for amendment. Any person owning or having an interest in property or the planning and zoning commission may file an application for a map amendment with the planning commission upon such forms as the commission may specify by rule. The application for amendment shall contain the information listed in section 108-352 and the procedure for a map amendment shall follow the regulations listed in section 108-352. 
(Code 2004, § 152.228; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Secs. 108-360—108-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCE AND APPEALS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 108-377. - Authority to grant variances. 
(a)  Variance applications. A property owner or his authorized agent may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the community development director. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The community development director may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed used and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. A fee, as established by the city council, shall accompany the variance application. 
(b)  Conditions and criteria for granting a variance. The planning and zoning commission, in cases where specifically authorized, may make a recommendation to the council to grant a variance only after consideration and adoption of findings of fact that all of the following conditions exist and criteria are met. 
(1)  There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner or occupant's own actions. The conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
(2)  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty that renders it difficult to carry out the provisions of this division. 
(3)  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which the property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  The variance approved is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(5)  The variance does not permit a use of land, building or structure which is not permitted by right in the land use intensity district in which the proposed development is located. 
(c)  Staff investigation and report. The community development director shall make an investigation of all variance applications and shall prepare a report thereon, considering applicable criteria specified herein. The investigation shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The investigation shall also be made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing scheduled on the matter. A copy of the investigation will be included with the recommendation to the city council on the requested variance. 
(d)  Notice and hearing. Upon the filing of any complete application for a variance with the community development director, a public hearing shall be scheduled and held on the proposed variance in accordance with section 108-352. 
(e)  Action on variances. The planning and zoning commission shall make findings and render a recommendation in writing within 30 days after the initial public hearing on the proposed variance. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regular meeting for final decision. The city shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision within five days after the city council has rendered its decision. 
(Code 2004, § 152.235; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006; Am. Ord. No. 433, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 108-378. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(a)  Any person who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the community development director in the administration, enforcement, and/or interpretation of this division, may file an appeal with the community development director stating the grounds for such appeal. The planning commission is hereby authorized to hear and decide said appeals, after proper application, public hearing and adoption of relevant findings of fact. 
(b)  An appeal from a ruling of the community development director shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. The commission may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings of the community development director. In cases where an appeal is granted, the commission shall have all necessary powers of the community development director and may issue building permits and land use permits, or direct the issuance of building permits and land use permits not otherwise inconsistent with this division and any other code, resolution, or ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 152.236; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Secs. 108-379—108-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 108-400. - Authority to grant conditional use permits. 
Under some unusual circumstances a use which more intensely affects an area than those uses permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may nevertheless be desirable and also compatible with permitted uses within the zoning district if that use is properly controlled and regulated. The planning commission may allow such a use to exist as a conditional use where these unusual circumstances exist and where the conditional use will be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this division. 
(Code 2004, § 152.245; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-401. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application to be made. Written application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the planning commission and filed with the community development director who shall transmit the application to the planning commission. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property affected and shall state the information provided is accurate and truthful. 
(b)  Application fee. The applicant shall pay a fee to cover advertising, review, publishing and reporting the proceedings of the planning commission. 
(c)  Contents of application. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property; 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the property; 
(3)  The existing use, proposed conditional use and the zoning district in which the property is located; 
(4)  A statement of the relationship and general compatibility of the proposed use to adjacent land use in terms of traffic, parking and noise and other nuisances; 
(5)  A list of all owners of property, including their mailing addresses, which is contiguous to or directly across the street from the property; 
(6)  Three copies of a plot plan showing: 
a.  Boundaries and dimensions of the property and the size and location of all proposed or existing structures. 
b.  Traffic access, traffic circulation, existing and proposed utility easements, parking, location of trees and shrubs, signs, refuse and service areas. 
c.  Any additional information required by the secretary of the planning commission to establish the advisability of granting the conditional use permit. 
(Code 2004, § 152.246; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-402. - Criteria for approval. 
The following criteria shall be considered for each application for a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Whether the proposed conditional use is a listed conditional use in the appropriate article of this chapter for the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(2)  Whether the development standards of the zoning district in which the property is located are being complied with. 
(3)  Whether the proposed use will create an undue burden on public facilities and services such as streets, utilities, schools and refuse disposal. 
(4)  Whether the proposed use will be detrimental to existing and future neighboring uses, and will involve a use, structure or condition of operation that constitutes a nuisance or hazard to any persons or property. 
(Code 2004, § 152.247; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Sec. 108-403. - Procedure. 
(a)  Setting hearing. The community development director shall set a public hearing to review applications for a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Notice of hearing and time for consideration. The community development director shall notify the public of the hearing in accordance with section 108-352. 
(c)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall grant or deny the conditional use permit following the public hearing and after considering the criteria listed in section 108-402. Its decision shall be accompanied by written findings of fact and impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to secure the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(d)  Right to appeal. Any party, including the administrative staff of the city, aggrieved or affected by the decision of the planning commission involving an application for a conditional use permit may appeal to city council. 
(e)  Issuance of conditional use permit. Upon approval of the planning commission or upon appeal and approval by the city council, the community development director shall issue to the applicant a conditional use permit which includes any conditions imposed by the planning commission and any modifications ordered by council on appeal. Such permit shall become effective upon approval by the planning commission or upon appeal and approval by council. A conditional use permit shall authorize only one particular conditional use and such permit shall automatically expire if, for any reason, the conditional use shall not begin within two years after the permit is issued or shall cease for more than six months after the permit is issued. A conditional use permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not run with the land, and shall expire upon a transfer of ownership. 
(f)  Violation of findings of fact. Whenever a previously approved conditional use is in violation of any of the findings of fact or other imposed conditions, pursuant to section 108-402, the community development director shall give notice in the same manner as service of summons in civil cases, or by certified mail addressed to the owner of record of the premises at his last-known address, or to the address to which tax bills are sent. The notice shall include reasons by which the community development director finds the conditional use to be in violation, and a statement that the owner shall have 30 days to comply with the granted conditional use permit. 
(g)  Permit revocation. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the notice, community development director shall notify the planning commission that the conditional use is in violation and itemize the reasons for revocation of the conditional use permit. The planning commission shall continue or revoke the conditional use permit at its first regular meeting after the notice is received. 
(h)  Appeal. Any party, including administrative staff of the city, aggrieved or affected by the decision of the planning commission involving a revocation of a conditional use permit may appeal to the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 152.248; Ord. No. 381, 4-10-2006) 
Chapter 110 - SOLAR LAND USE 

Sec. 110-1. - Rules of construction. 
Standard rules related to the structure and use of these regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter shall be held to serve as the minimum requirements necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  Where there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall prevail unless the specific language of the regulations requires a different interpretation. 
(3)  Where an amendment to the provisions of this chapter has been adopted by the city council and the adopted amendment conflicts with a preexisting provision found in this chapter, the provision which is more restrictive shall prevail. 
(4)  Purpose statements are not regulatory standards but rather descriptions of intent that guide the application, interpretation, and administration of this chapter. 
(5)  Figures, graphics, and illustrations, and supporting captions related to such items, are not regulatory standards, but are included to assist in the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter. Where there is an inconsistency between a figure, graphic, and illustration, and supporting captions related to such items, and the written text of a provision herein, the written text shall control unless the specific language of the regulations requires a different interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.001, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-2. - Terms and definitions; solar land uses. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words related to solar land uses, and associated legal, scientific, technical, and general terms, are hereby defined, and shall have those meanings ascribed to them as provided herein. All other words and phrases shall assume their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, or a specific definition has been ascribed to them as provided within a separate section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.002, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-3. - Categories of solar land uses. 
The terms and definitions provided in this section refer to the types of principal and accessory solar land uses that are regulated by the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of categorizing and defining solar land uses, the terms herein may be considered "umbrella" in nature, meaning that they encompass a wide variety of utility scale solar collection, conversion and transmission systems for off-site power consumption as well as small-scale individual systems intended for on-site power consumption for uses such as a residence or business. Some of the terms provided in this section are augmented by supporting figures, and/or representative illustrations. 
Solar energy system means a system capable of collecting and converting solar radiant energy (through direct, diffuse, and/or reflective collection) into heat, mechanical, or electrical energy and transfers the produced electricity into a separate apparatus to store or to a point of use which include, but are not limited to, water heaters, interior space heaters or coolers, or electrical energy generation. Solar energy systems primarily consist of solar collection devices and mechanical equipment related to solar energy (transformers, inverters, etc.). 
Solar energy system, principal (PSES) means a solar energy system which is the principal or primary use on a single lot or parcel which is used to collect and convert solar energy into usable electricity using on-site equipment for the primary purpose of transmitting electricity off-site to be used by an electric utility. These systems include all uses defined by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) under code 221114, which includes solar farms. (See figures B.1 and B.2) 

Figure B.1. A principal solar energy system may occupy an entire lot

Figure B.2. A property owner may choose to subdivide their property and place a solar farm on one of the newly created lots thus creating a principal use for that lot.
Solar energy system, accessory (ASES), means a solar energy system that is an accessory use to the principal use of a property, meaning it is incidental to the principal use and is subordinate in area or purpose. Accessory systems may be roof-mounted, ground-mounted or parking-mounted. (See figures C.1 and C.2.) 

Figure C.1. Accessory solar energy systems may include building-mounted and/or ground-mounted systems, as shown in this illustration. They may be allowed in front, side or rear yards, although some restrictions may apply.

Figure C.2. Accessory solar energy systems can also include parking-mounted systems, as illustrated above. An accessory system can include any combination of building-mounted, ground-mounted or parking-mounted systems, subject to additional conditions.
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.003, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-4. - Methods of collection. 
Solar collection systems come in a variety of configurations, utilize variable technologies and materials, and incorporate interrelated structures and components, in order to actively collect, convert, and transmit solar radiant energy in a safe and efficient manner. The terms and definitions provided in this section represent some, but not all, of the solar collection structures and components related to the solar land uses regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. A solar collection system which produces electricity by the use of photovoltaic cells which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roof-mounted or ground-mounted. Photovoltaic systems are generally comprised of the following components: 

(2)  Solar thermal systems. A solar collection system which produces electricity by the use of photovoltaic cells which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roof-mounted or ground-mounted. Photovoltaic systems are generally composed of the following components: 
a.  Flat plate collection. System which collects solar radiation to heat a liquid which, in turn, will be used to heat water or enclosed areas. This system generally contains a plate (panel) over tubes housed in a shell. 
b.  Evacuated tube collection. System general composed of hollow tubes which contains a liquid used for the purpose of heating large volumes of water or heat water to a high temperature. 
(3)  Concentrated solar systems. A solar collection system that uses mirrors or lenses to concentrate sunlight and create temperatures high enough to heat water or fluids to drive steam turbines that, in turn, create electricity: 
a.  Parabolic trough. Curved mirrors are used to focus the sun's radiant energy onto a receiver tube that runs down the center of a trough. High temperature transfer fluid passes through a heat exchanger to heat water. 
b.  Compact linear Fresnel reflector. Similar to the parabolic trough, with the exception of long parallel rows of mirrors being used as a lower-cost option. 
c.  Power tower. Structure where mirrors are used to focus the radiant energy of the sun on a receiver at the top of a tower to heat transfer fluid to produce steam. 


(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.004, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-5. - Solar energy system structures and components. 
The terms provided in this section include legal, scientific, technical, and other general terms that are referenced in the provisions of this chapter, for which the inclusion of a related definition may assist in the application, interpretation, and administration of the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Building-mounted solar energy system. A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top of a roof or on the side of a building. (See figures 2.4 A1 and A2.) Building-mounted systems may be flush-mounted or non-flush-mounted. 

Figures 2.4.A1 and 2.4.A2. Building-mounted examples.
(2)  Building-integrated solar energy system. A type of building-mounted system that is an integral part of a building rather than a separate device, replacing a typical component of a building. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings. (See figures 2.4 B1 and B2.) 

Figures 2.4.B1 and 2.4.B2. Building-integrated examples
(3)  Ground-mounted solar collection system. Solar energy system that is directly installed in the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing structure. This can include pole-mounted systems that allow for the tracking of the sun. 

(4)  Parking-mounted solar collection system. A solar energy system that is installed above a paved surface vehicle parking area. Parking-mounted systems may cover any amount of parking spaces on a parcel but may not be installed in such a way that prevents the use of more than ten percent of existing spaces. (See figures 2.4 D1 and D2.) A system mounted on top of a parking garage would be considered a building-mounted system. Such systems cannot impact the minimum number of parking spaces or the dimensions of parking spaces as required by the city land use ordinance. 

Figures 2.4.D1 and 2.4.D2. Parking-mounted examples.
(5)  Solar panel. For the purpose of this chapter, a solar panel may refer to a solar module or surface component of a flat plate collector. Solar panels are meant to absorb, not reflect, sunlight. 
(6)  Power inverter. A device that inverts the direct current (DC) electricity produced by a solar PV system into usable alternating current (AC). 
(7)  Mechanical equipment related to solar energy systems. All items not listed in these definitions that are directly related to a construction and operation of a solar energy system including, but not limited to, on-site transmission lines, pumps, batteries, inverters, mounting brackets, framing, foundations or other structures, etc. 
(8)  Off-grid solar photovoltaic system with battery back-up. Solar PV electricity system designed to operate independently from a local utility grid and provide electricity to a building, boat, recreational vehicle, sign, remote pump, gates, etc. These systems usually require a battery bank to store electricity generated by solar for use at night or a rainy day. 

Figures 2.4.D1 and 2.4.D2. Parking-mounted examples.
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.005, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-6. - Other terms related to solar land uses. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flush-mounted means a type of building-mounted system in which there is no space between the solar panels or collectors and the structure of the building. 
Kilowatt (kW) means a measure of the use of electrical power equal to 1,000 watts. 
Kilowatt-hour (kWh) means a unit of energy equivalent to one kilowatt (one kW) of power expended for one hour. 
Megawatt (MW) means a measure of the use of electrical power equal to 1,000 kilowatts. 
Megawatt-hour (MWh) means a unit of energy equivalent to one megawatt (one MW) of power expended for one hour. 
Mobile home park solar energy system means a principal solar energy system (PSES) and shall follow all application procedures for a principal solar energy system (PSES). 
Roof pitch means the final exterior slope of a building roof calculated by the rise over the run, typically, but not exclusively, expressed in twelfths such as 3/12 , 9/12 , 12/12 . 
Solar collector coverage means a solar energy system that is an integral part of a building rather than a separate device, replacing a typical component of a building. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings. 
Solar energy easement means easement that limits the height or location, or both, of structures or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access to sunlight. 
Solar farm means large-scale solar energy systems. These facilities are typically larger tracts of land containing hundreds of arrays of photovoltaic panels covering the majority of a parcel. A solar farm development is associated with a principal solar energy system. 
Solar garden means a small-scale solar energy system that is sometimes operated under the form of a cooperative. These facilities generally contain a smaller number of arrays for the purpose of sharing the benefit of energy production. A solar garden development is usually associated with accessory solar energy systems. A solar garden would be an appropriate development for a residential planned unit development, a conservation preservation residential zone, or the residential portion of a community mixed use development. 
Solar glare means the effect produced by light reflecting from a solar panel with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.006, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-7. - Solar energy systems regulations; applicability. 
All solar energy systems are subject to supplemental and use-specific regulations. Principal solar energy systems and accessory solar energy systems referenced as a conditional use require legislative approval as provided by this chapter and are subject to all conditions listed in applicable sections of this chapter and may be subject to additional conditions of the legislative body. Accessory solar energy systems referenced as administrative permit uses may be approved by the community development director or his designee subject to the adherence to the conditions listed in the applicable sections of this chapter. 
(1)  Land uses listed in table 3.1 shall be permitted with conditions or permitted as a conditional use in each applicable zoning district. Uses shall not be permitted, buildings and structures associated with such use shall not be erected, structurally altered or enlarged on property, unless said use is permitted within the applicable zoning district as listed in table 3.1 and in accordance with one of the following designations: 
a.  P (permitted use): indicates that the use is permitted in the zoning district. 
b.  AP (administrative permit): indicates the use is permitted in the zoning district subject to administrative review and use-specific requirements contained in section 110-9. 
c.  C (conditional use): indicates that the use may be permitted by the governing body subject to use-specific requirements contained in section 110-8 and procedural requirements listed in the city/town/county ordinance. 
(2)  Any listed use that does not have a letter P, AP, or C listed in a particular zoning district is prohibited in that zoning district. 
(3)  The size of any solar system within this jurisdiction shall be determined based first upon the square footage of all equipment and, if necessary, second upon electrical capacity of the system. 
TABLE 3.1. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM—APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS 

 

 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.007, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-8. - Regulations for specific land uses or supplemental use requirements; principal solar energy systems (PSES). 
(a)  Dimensional requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot sizes. The minimum lot size (in acres) needed to place a principal solar energy system is listed in table 4.1 (below). 
TABLE 4.1: MINIMUM LOT SIZE IN ACRES 

 
(2)  Setbacks. Principal solar energy systems shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet in addition to the existing setbacks established in the zoning district. This applies to the edge of any solar collectors or mechanical equipment related to solar energy systems. Power inverters, transformers, and other related equipment connected with the inversion of power shall have a setback of 50 feet in addition to existing setback established in the zoning district. The ideal location for power inverters, transformers and related equipment should be located in the center of the principal solar energy system development. Deviations from this ideal must be requested in the development request. 
(3)  Height of principal solar energy system collector. Height of ground-mounted or parking-mounted solar collectors and mounts shall not exceed 20 feet in height when oriented to maximum tilt for principal solar energy system collectors. 
(b)  Relationship to other land uses. 
(1)  Airports. Any solar energy system proposed within a 20,000-foot radius of an airport runway shall present evidence that they have gone through a review process with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). This review from the FAA shall indicate that the proposed solar energy system shall not interfere with normal operation of aircraft in an area. This review must be presented and evaluated by staff prior to any development beginning. 
(2)  Historic districts. No principal solar energy system shall be located in a designated National Register Historic District. There are no such districts in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter. When additional designations are made by the United States Department of the Interior, this location restriction shall apply upon any subsequent location request. In addition, no principal solar energy system shall be located in the city Central Historic District, the City of Sanders Historic District, or the City of Sawdust Historic District as adopted by the city council. As the districts are expanded by the city council, this location restriction shall apply upon any subsequent location request. 
(3)  Historic structures. All historic structures, as recorded by the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources located within 1,000 feet of a proposed development, must be listed and located in a development application. 
(4)  Environmentally sensitive areas. Principal solar energy systems proposed for development in an environmentally sensitive area must provide an environmental impact statement for evaluation prior to approval. 
(5)  Residential land uses. Principal solar energy systems may be allowed in areas in residential zoning districts (or areas in which the primary land use is residential) as long as the minimum lot size is met (table 4.1) and setbacks are met (subsection (a)(2) of this section). 
(c)  Buffering and screening. 
(1)  Fencing. A security fence at a minimum height of eight feet with a gate and locking mechanism shall enclose the perimeter of the principal solar energy system to deny access to any individuals not authorized to be on the property and for public safety. 
(2)  Buffering and screening. After a review of a proposed solar energy system by the community development director or legislative body, either entity may require a buffer or screening for the proposed solar facility. If it is determined that either a buffer or screening is necessary, one or a combination of the following options may be implemented: 
a.  On-site mature vegetation exists at a minimum height of ten feet and depth of the building setback for the zoning district plus 20 feet between the security fence and the adjacent properties and right-of-way; 
b.  A single row of evergreens in combination with mature vegetation installed at a height of five feet, achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years; 
c.  A double row of off-set evergreens absent mature vegetation, installed at a height of five feet, achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years; or 
d.  A berm combined with evergreens vegetation installed at a height of five feet, achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years. 
(d)  Signage. 
(1)  Allowed signage. The manufacturer's and/or installer's identification and appropriate warning signs shall be posted in a clear and visible manner at the site. These signs must follow the provision of the sign ordinance for the area in which it is located. A warning sign concerning voltage must be placed on the main gate and include the name and contact telephone number for the solar energy system operator in case of emergency. 
(2)  Advertisements. No business signs, billboards, or any other advertising shall be installed on any mechanical equipment or solar panels nor placed on the property on which the solar energy system is the principal use. 
(e)  Construction and operation. 
(1)  Transmission lines. All power transmission lines located within the principal solar energy system on a single lot shall be placed underground to the extent possible. 
(2)  Glint and glare. All solar panels or arrays used for the principal solar energy system shall be located to avoid glint and glare onto and upon adjacent properties and adjacent roadways in a manner that shall not create a safety hazard. 
(3)  Noise. Noise levels of all mechanical equipment related to principal solar energy systems (PSES) should not exceed 65 decibels (dB) at the property line on which the PSES is located. 
(4)  Decommissioning. Applicants proposing a principal solar energy system shall include in its application to develop a principal solar energy system contingency plans for decommissioning of the system that shall include plans for disassembly of the system and its removal. A bond for the removal of the system may be required. 
(f)  Application required for principal solar energy systems. Principal solar energy systems may be permitted within the boundaries of the city as a conditional use. This requires the potential developer of this facility to go through established procedural processes within this chapter and provide a submittal package as established in subsection (g) of this section. No land disturbance permit may be issued for or principal solar energy system to begin development without approval from the city council. 
(g)  Processing applications for principal solar energy systems. A principal solar energy solar system may only be approved as a conditional use on a lot. A conditional use application must be submitted as set forth in this chapter and shall also be subject to and processed in accordance with this section. A conditional use is not a use by right, and may be subject to approval, approval with conditions, or denial by action of the city council acting upon a recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission. A submittal package is required for proposed principal solar energy systems which shall include the following: 
(1)  Application. A conditional use application shall be submitted by anyone wishing to place a principal solar energy system within the municipal/county boundaries. 
(2)  Recorded plat or boundary survey. 
(3)  Site plan. The scaled site plan must show property boundaries, location and size (area) of solar collectors and mechanical equipment related to solar, fencing, and if applicable the location of natural buffering and screening features located on the property. 
(4)  A description of solar collectors and mechanical equipment related to solar including: 
a.  UL certification for equipment on site; 
b.  Written documentation stating that the facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state regulations. 
(5)  Other information as may be required by the community development director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.008, 3-26-2018) 
Sec. 110-9. - Regulations for specific land uses and supplemental use requirements—accessory solar energy systems. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all accessory solar energy systems except for ground-mounted systems with coverage of greater than 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure on lot, which are treated as principal solar energy systems. 
(1)  Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any upgrade, modification, or structural change that materially alters the size or placement of an existing solar energy system shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Even if they are deemed accessory to the principal use of a property, ground-mounted systems covering an area equivalent to more than 50 percent of the footprint of the primary structure on the property are regulated as principal solar energy systems, with requirements set out in section 110-8. 
(b)  General requirements. The installation and construction of an accessory solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards: 
(1)  An accessory solar energy system is permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory to a principal use. 
(2)  A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection. 
(3)  An accessory solar energy system may be roof-mounted, ground-mounted, parking-mounted, or any combination of the three, provided the system meet the supplemental requirements pertaining to accessory solar energy systems. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot sizes. There is no minimum lot size requirement for an accessory solar energy system. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  Ground-mounted systems may be located within required building setbacks. 
b.  The minimum solar energy system setback distance from the property lines shall be equivalent to the accessory building setback requirement of the underlying zoning district. 
c.  With respect to building-mounted systems, only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy systems may be installed on street-facing building elevations. 
d.  In residential zoning districts, a ground-mounted system, parking-mounted system, or system attached to an accessory building shall not be located within a required street setback or street/front yard. This restriction shall also apply to the side yard in any residential district. Any side yard application shall be subject to approval by a locally appointed and elected body as part of the application process. 
(3)  Height. 
a.  A building-mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or accessory building. A building-mounted system, whether mounted on the principal building or accessory building, may not extend more than ten feet above the highest point of the roof line of a flat roof and not above the roof line of any other roof, such as, but not limited to, gable, gambrel, or hip roofs. 
b.  A building-mounted system may not extend more than ten feet beyond the maximum principal building height or accessory building height specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district. In no instance shall any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the edge of the roof. 
c.  Ground-mounted and parking-mounted systems shall not exceed the maximum building height for accessory buildings. If no height limit is specified for accessory buildings, ground-mounted or parking-mounted systems may not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(d)  Parcel or building coverage. 
(1)  Building-mounted systems may cover any amount of a roof but may not extend beyond the roofline. 
(2)  Accessory ground-mounted systems may cover an area no larger than 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure on the parcel. Any larger and the system is treated as a principal solar energy system. 
(3)  Parking-mounted systems shall only cover paved surfaces intended for parking. Non-residential driveways may not be covered by parking-mounted systems. 
(4)  Only building integrated systems shall be installed on residential-type roofs visible from public rights-of-way. 
(e)  Screening. All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Mechanical equipment for nonresidential systems shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery, trees, or other non-invasive plant species which provide a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence may be used. 
(2)  Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks specified for accessory structures in the underlying zoning district. 
(f)  Historic districts. Accessory solar energy systems on buildings or properties within federal, state, or locally designated historic districts or on locally designated historic buildings will require a certificate of appropriateness unless the installation is not visible from the street. A certificate of appropriateness from the city historic preservation commission shall be an essential component of any application. 
(g)  Other considerations. 
(1)  Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable building and electrical code requirements as adopted by the state department of community affairs. 
(2)  Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar easements to protect access to sunlight. Any such easements must be recorded with the county clerk of superior court. 
(3)  Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties or roadways. 
(4)  Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any airport in a manner that would interfere with airport flight patterns. Acknowledgment from the Federal Aviation Administration will be necessary. 
(5)  All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy system to any building or other structure shall be located underground unless precluded by building codes adopted by the state department of community affairs. 
(6)  A solar energy system shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the solar energy system provided they comply with the prevailing sign regulations. 
(7)  The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable industry standards. The local utility provider shall be contacted to determine grid interconnection and net metering policies. 
(h)  Approvals and permits. 
(1)  All accessory solar energy systems shall require administrative plan approval resulting in a building permit. 
(2)  All accessory solar energy systems shall require a building permit. 
(3)  A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has been issued following a zoning review. 
(i)  Plan applications. 
(1)  Plan applications for accessory solar energy systems shall be accompanied by to-scale horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the property for a ground-mounted system, including the property lines. 
(2)  For all building-mounted (non-flush-mounted) systems, the elevation must show the highest finished slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted. 
(j)  Administrative variance. This Code encourages the installation of productive solar energy systems and recognizes that a balance must be achieved between character and aesthetic considerations and the reasonable desire of building owners to harvest their renewable energy resources. Where the standards in this chapter cannot be met without diminishing, as defined below, the minimum reasonable performance of the solar energy system, an administrative variance may be sought from the community development director or his designee. An administrative variance shall be granted if the administrative variance standards are met. 
(1)  Minimum performance design standards. The following design considerations are needed for the efficient operation of a solar energy system: 
a.  Fixed-mount active solar energy systems. Solar energy systems must be mounted to face with 45 degrees of south (180 degrees azimuth). 
b.  Solar electric (photovoltaic) systems. Solar electric (photovoltaic) systems must have a pitch that is within 20 degrees of latitude, a pitch of between 20 and 65 degrees. 
c.  Solar hot water systems. Solar collectors must be mounted at a pitch between 40 and 60 degrees. 
(2)  Standards for an administrative variance. A variance shall be granted by the community development director or his designee if the applicant demonstrates that the following safety, performance and aesthetic conditions are met: 
a.  Aesthetic conditions. The solar energy system must be designed to blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way other than alleys to the maximum extent possible while still allowing the system to be mounted for efficient performance. 
b.  Safety conditions. All applicable health and safety standards are met. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 156.009, 3-26-2018) 
Chapter 112 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 112-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream and drainage channels; 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 1.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all development plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the community development director or his designee under the specifications of article III of this chapter. This chapter also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that disturbs one acre or more of land; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(5)  Any development project regardless of size deemed by the city that shall contribute to a known or suspected water quality or quantity impairment. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 1.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-3. - Exempt activities. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. 
(b)  When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in article II of this chapter, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current local stormwater design manual (LDM). This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 1.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-4. - Establishment of a local stormwater design manual (LDM). 
(a)  The city has furnished additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter and has provided such information in the form of an LDM. The LDM will serve to supplement and/or clarify information set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(b)  The LDM will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the city, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards during the design and permitting phase of a land development project. 
(c)  The stormwater local design manual is maintained by the city manager and made available through the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 1.4, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-5—112-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 112-27. - Permit required. 
No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-28. - Plat required. 
No landowner or land operator shall receive approval of any official plats without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to submitting an application to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-29. - Application requirements. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for land development activities shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application must include the minimum requirements as defined in this article or LDM in order for the permit application to be considered. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-30. - Application review fees. 
The city may require the submittal of a review fee for review of the stormwater management plan. This review fee shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city council. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and all fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any development permits. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.4, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-31. - Application procedure. 
All applications received by the city will be received and processed in the manner outlined in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.5, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-32. - Permit duration. 
Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. Should no activity take place on the site, the permit shall expire within one year of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 2.6, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-33—112-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 112-53. - Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the community development director for approval. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions apply or the applicant presents sufficient engineering data and analysis to support their request for a waiver as determined by the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development will not impair attainment of the objectives of this article. 
(2)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city and local ordinance (or some other legally enforceable document) that requires the implementation of the plan. 
(3)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
(4)  The city finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
(5)  Non-structural practices will be used on the site that reduce: 
a.  The generation of stormwater from the site; 
b.  The size and cost of stormwater storage; and 
c.  The pollutants generated at the site. These non-structural practices shall be explained in detail in the local or state design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 3.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-54. - Conditions of waiver. 
In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the community development director may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development director or his designee that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
(1)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(2)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; and 
(4)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 3.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-55. - Mitigation requirements for waivers. 
Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the city. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(2)  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article. 
(3)  Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management program activities. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 3.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-56. - Fee-in-lieu of stormwater management practices. 
(a)  Where the city waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the city. 
(b)  When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the city agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the city. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any development permits. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 3.4, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-57. - Dedication of land. 
In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the development permits. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 3.5, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-58—112-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER 

Sec. 112-88. - Stormwater performance criteria. 
Unless judged by the city to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge stormwater directly into a state water without adequate control of stormwater runoff. If such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the city. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) or the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained to the maximum extent practical, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods where allowable. 
(4)  For new development, stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove pollutants to levels prescribed in the current LDM. It is presumed that best management practices (BMP) comply with this performance standard if it is: 
a.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv); 
b.  Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the LDM; 
c.  Constructed properly; and 
d.  Maintained regularly. 
(5)  To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the current LDM. 
(6)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, etc.) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(7)  Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
(8)  Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices (STPs) and pollution prevention practices. 
(9)  Prior to design, applicants are encouraged to consult with the city to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(10)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the LDM shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 4, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-89—112-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 112-120. - Minimum control requirements. 
All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, ten-year, 100-year) as identified in the LDM are met, unless the city grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city's right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed in volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 5.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-121. - Site design feasibility. 
Stormwater management practice for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Applicants shall consult the current LDM for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 5.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-122. - Conveyance issues. 
All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. The current LDM shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 5.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-123. - Landscaping plans required. 
All stormwater management practices that utilize wetlands vegetation as part of the functional treatment process (e.g. constructed wetlands, etc.) must submit a separate landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by an individual having a professional certification by the Society of Wetlands Scientists and has who completed three projects of a similar nature that has been successfully implemented or equivalent qualifications as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 5.4, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-124. - Non-structural stormwater practices. 
The use of non-structural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current LDM, and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 5.5, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-125—112-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL 

Sec. 112-147. - Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
(a)  No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state. Further, pursuant to the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. § 43-15-2, as amended, a surveyor registered in the state may prepare hydrologic studies and design stormwater drainage systems. Said plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and if on-site, the general location and type of practice. 
(b)  This final plan must be signed by a professional engineer licensed in the state, who will verify the design of all stormwater management practices. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a professional engineer licensed in the state, who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the current LDM. No development permits shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the community development director or his designee after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 6.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-148. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
A stormwater management plan shall be required with development permit applications for applicable development projects and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, to evaluate the environmental characteristics) of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site and the impact on future water resources and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the applicant will prepare a design report which shall include elements sufficient to ensure compliance with this article as outlined in the current LDM. The city has the right to extend the requirements to ensure compliance with this article if the requirements in the current LDM prove to be insufficient. However, in that case, the city must provide written explanation of the additional elements needed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 6.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-149. - Performance bond/security. 
(a)  The city may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices under the permit, plus 25 percent as agreed to by the applicant and the city. 
(b)  The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(c)  The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a professional engineer, landscape architect and surveyor licensed in the state that the stormwater practice will function in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The city will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages may be done at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 6.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-150. - Errors and omissions insurance. 
The city shall require a professional engineer, landscape architect or registered surveyor licensed in the state to maintain in full force and affect errors and omissions liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence while practicing in the city. Said certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the city to confirm that such insurance has been procured and is in force. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 6.4, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-151—112-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 

Sec. 112-169. - Notice of construction commencement. 
The applicant must notify the city in advance before the commencement of construction. If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified by the community development director or his designee in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 7.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-170. - As-built plans. 
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located both on-site and off-site after final construction is completed in a format specified in the current LDM. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect or registered surveyor licensed in the state. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 7.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-171. - Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(a)  Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be revegetated within ten days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
(1)  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
(2)  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
(3)  Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed in accordance with other such requirements in this Code of Ordinances. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 7.3, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-172—112-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 112-196. - Maintenance easement. 
Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final plat that has a stormwater management facility as part of the project, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-197. - Maintenance covenants. 
(a)  Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the city and recorded into the final plat prior to final approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(b)  The city, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-198. - Requirements for maintenance covenants. 
Stormwater management facilities may be required to undergo annual inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation removal; and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. The requirement for such inspections shall be outlined in the maintenance covenant. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-199. - Inspection of stormwater facilities. 
Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.4, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-200. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system or sanitary sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.5, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-201. - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.6, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-202. - Failure to maintain practices. 
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall affect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner and within the established deadline. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 8.7, 7-23-2018) 
Secs. 112-203—112-227. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 112-228. - Violations. 
Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.1, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-229. - Notice of violation. 
When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, the community development director or his designee shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)  The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that shall or may be to whom the notice of violation is directed as provided herein and against the person; 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within three days of service of notice of violation. Persons receiving a notice of violation may be required to halt all construction activities via a stop-work order. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.2, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-230. - Stop-work orders. 
This stop-work order will be in effect until the city confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner, as determined by the city, can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.3, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-231. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.4, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-232. - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.5, 7-23-2018) 
Sec. 112-233. - Holds on occupation permits. 
Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1812, § 9.6, 7-23-2018) 
Chapter 114 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the constitution of the state and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 2004, § 155.02; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "subdivision regulations" of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 155.03; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-3. - Purpose. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles. 
(3)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other policies and objectives of the city. 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land subdivisions through the dedication or reservation of land for public purposes. 
(5)  To ensure equitable review and approval of all subdivisions by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
(Code 2004, § 155.04; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-4. - Intent and application. 
It is the intent of this chapter that it will apply to and provide guidance for the subdivision of lands within the incorporated limits of the city. Any land development activity in which property is subdivided must first comply with this chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 155.05; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Concept plat means a drawing which shows the overall concept of a proposed development, as further defined in these regulations. 
Easement means legal authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
Final plat means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certifications required by this chapter and conforming to the Georgia Plat Act. 
Preliminary plat means a drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lot layout arrangement, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in these regulations. 
Sketch plat. See Concept plat. 
(Code 2004, § 155.11; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-6. - Subdividing land. 
No tract of land within the city shall be subdivided without prior approval of the city in accordance with this chapter; provided, however, the division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved is exempt from this requirement, provided that the parcel has access. 
(Code 2004, § 155.15; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-7. - Recording a plat. 
No plat of a subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it shall first have the approval of the city as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 155.16; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-8. - Use of a plat. 
The transfer of title or sale of land by reference to a plat of a subdivision that has not been given approval by the city and properly recorded in accordance with this chapter is prohibited. 
(Code 2004, § 155.17; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-9. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city unless that lot was legally existing prior to the enactment of this chapter or unless that lot shall first have been created in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 155.18; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-10. - Dedication of land and facilities. 
No land or facilities shall be dedicated to the city for public ownership or use unless that dedication is made in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 2004, § 155.19; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-11. - Differences in ordinances. 
Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards required under this chapter and those contained in the comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, development regulations, building codes, city center plan, greenway and multi-use trail network plan, or other ordinances or regulations, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 2004, § 155.26; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-12—114-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-41. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed unsuitable for development due to wetlands, marshlands, steep slopes, unsuitable soils, subsurface conditions or other undesirable properties, shall not be subjected to development for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these conditions. In particular, no land within the delineated 100-year floodplain or within any required watershed protection buffer shall be subdivided for development or included within any lot proposed for subdivision for any development. In addition, no undisturbed buffer that is required by any of the city's development codes and ordinances in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community shall be included within any lot proposed for subdivision for any development. Areas deemed unsuitable for development shall not be included in calculations for determining the number of lots that may be included in a subdivision. 
(Code 2004, § 155.25; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-42. - Conformance. 
All proposed subdivisions must conform to the adopted comprehensive plan of the city. When features of the comprehensive plan, such as parks, streets, utility systems, and buffers, are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the comprehensive plan but are considered essential by the community development director, land for those features may be required to be dedicated to the city. 
(Code 2004, § 155.27; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-43. - Access. 
(a)  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such lots shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(b)  No subdivision should be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development should be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties, which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the subject property. Locations of interparcel access shall be as required by and subject to the approval of the city. Private streets, as may be approved under the provisions of this article, shall be constructed to the roadway standards of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 155.28; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-44—114-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - THE CONCEPT PLAT 

Sec. 114-75. - Purpose of concept plat. 
The purpose of a concept plat review is to provide a developer with an economical way to work with the city staff, the planning commission, and the city council in reaching a general agreement as to the nature of a proposed land subdivision project, its impact on the community, and its conformance with the codes, ordinances, plans and policies of the city. For the concept plat review, the developer will not need detailed architectural and engineering drawings. 
(Code 2004, § 155.35; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-76. - Concept plat specifications. 
As a minimum, the following information and materials should be provided as a part of the concept plat application package: 
(1)  One copy of an accurate and up-to-date survey of the property proposed for subdivision; 
(2)  One copy of a vicinity map at a scale of 1:600 showing the property in relation to the general area of the city in which it is located; 
(3)  One copy of a completed project data sheet; 
(4)  Six copies of a one-page schematic plat drawn clearly and accurately by a design professional at a scale appropriate for the nature of the project, to include: 
a.  Scale, north arrow, and date of preparation; 
b.  Approximate topography; 
c.  Significant natural features on and adjacent to the property including wetlands and 100-year floodplain, if appropriate; 
d.  Significant existing manmade features on the property; 
e.  Proposed streets, lots, public areas, open spaces, greenbelts, buffers, amenity areas, and other significant proposed improvements; 
f.  Zoning setbacks and the approximate area of each lot; 
g.  Any other features that will be important in the design and development of the project; and 
h.  Any off-site improvements that may be needed to properly develop the property. 
(5)  One copy of a reduced 11 inches by 17 inches copy of the concept plat suitable for distribution to the planning commission, the mayor and council, and the general public; 
(6)  Typical floor plans and elevations of the houses that are planned for the proposed subdivision; and 
(7)  A concept plat review fee. 
(Code 2004, § 155.36; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-77. - Concept plat review process. 
(a)  The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the community development director to discuss what is required for concept plat approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the community development director a complete concept plat application package. 
(c)  The concept plat application package is carefully checked by the community development director to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with subsection (b) of this section and no additional fee will be required. 
(d)  If the concept plat application package is complete, it will be accepted by the community development director; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the community development director or his designee shall have at least 15 working days for review of the concept plat, and preparing comments. 
(e)  If the community development director concludes the concept plat is not acceptable, the concept plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with written instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at subsection (b) of this section and a new plat review fee will be required. 
(f)  If the community development director approves the concept plat, it shall be forwarded to the developer and the developer will be authorized to proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat that will be based on the approved concept plat and be in accordance with all conditions and agreements included in the community development director's action to approve the concept plat. 
(Code 2004, § 155.37; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-78. - Concept plat certifications. 
(a)  Concept plat, owner's certification. 
I hereby submit this concept plat as the owner, or his authorized agent, of all property shown thereon. 
Signature of owner or authorized agent; Date 
Printed name of owner or authorized agent; Title 
(b)  Concept plat. 
This concept plat has been reviewed and approved by the city in accordance with these regulations and the other development codes and ordinances of the city. This approval expires in one year from this date if the owner/developer fails to secure preliminary plat approval by that time. However, the city manager may extend the approval if provided with compelling information from the developer. 
City manager; Date 
(Code 2004, § 155.38; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-79—114-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - THE PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 114-100. - Purpose of preliminary plat. 
The purpose of a preliminary plat is to provide a city review of a proposed subdivision at an intermediate point between the concept plat and a full set of construction plans. It is intended that this review will provide assurances that the plans which are being prepared are in accordance with all the development codes and ordinances of the city and with the conditions set forth in the approval of the concept plat. 
(Code 2004, § 155.45; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-101. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. The sheet size shall not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches; provided, however, a scale of 200 feet to one-inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of 36 inches by 48 inches. The minimum sheet size shall be 17 inches by 22 inches. At a minimum, the following information and materials should be provided as a part of the preliminary plat application package: 
(1)  One copy of an accurate and up-to-date boundary survey of the property proposed for subdivision; 
(2)  One copy of a completed preliminary plat application form; 
(3)  Six copies of the preliminary plat drawn clearly and accurately by a design professional at a scale appropriate for the nature of the project; 
(4)  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
(5)  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider; 
(6)  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the preparation of the preliminary plat; 
(7)  Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale; 
(8)  Subdivision location including land lot and land district, area in acres, internal and abutting zoning, proposed number of lots with minimum lot size, and proposed phasing, if any; 
(9)  A location sketch or vicinity map positioning the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to recognized permanent landmarks. The location sketch scale shall be at a scale of 600 feet to the inch; 
(10)  Boundary lines of the overall property perimeter showing bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines and the bearing and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The source of boundary information shall be shown. The boundary survey shall be tied to the state plane coordinate system at two locations along the boundary. Horizontal control point coordinates shall be indicated city subdivision regulations on the preliminary plat; 
(11)  Current field-run topography with mean sea level contours at intervals no greater than two feet. The source of topographic information shall be shown. The topographic survey shall have a coordinate system based on the Georgia State Plane Coordinate System, East Zone, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Elevations shown shall be based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). All measurements and coordinates shown shall use the U.S. Survey Foot definition. A benchmark shall be indicated on the preliminary plat; 
(12)  Accurate locations of all natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, state waters, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other significant features. The source of floodplain information shall be shown. In addition, the petitioner must provide a copy of the wetland delineation that has been approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(13)  Accurate locations of all cultural features such as all existing historic resources, cemeteries, rights-of-way, easements, pavements (including widths), bridges, culverts and storm drains, utility lines, appurtenances and structures, city and county jurisdictional limits, land lot and district lines, zoning districts and limits and other significant features; 
(14)  Proposed layout including lot lines with preliminary dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street rights-of-way with names and widths, easements, public use facilities, facilities exclusively for subdivision use and all relevant conditions of zoning; 
(15)  Location of all known existing or previous landfills, or statement that none exist; 
(16)  Proposed method of potable water supply and sewage disposal; and 
(17)  Preliminary plat certifications as specified in section 114-104. 
(Code 2004, § 155.46; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-102. - Preliminary plat, supplemental information. 
The following supplemental information shall be required for each submittal of a preliminary plat: 
(1)  A written summary of the proposed subdivision giving information as to the overall development plan including, as appropriate, the types and square footages of structures, number of housing units, types of land uses, anticipated traffic generation, and other pertinent information so that the effects of the subdivision can be considered by the community development director or designated development coordinator. 
(2)  Description of the anticipated utility systems required to serve the proposed subdivision including projected average and peak demands or flows for potable water (water availability report), fire protection, sewerage, and electrical power. 
(3)  Description of proposed stormwater management practices for the subdivision including the ownership and proper maintenance provisions of all stormwater management facilities within the subdivision. 
(4)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to obtain an adequate understanding of the subdivision. 
(Code 2004, § 155.47; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-103. - Preliminary plat review process. 
(a)  The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the community development director to discuss what is required for preliminary plat approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the community development director two complete preliminary plat application packages. 
(c)  The preliminary plat application package shall be carefully checked by the community development director to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with subsection (b) of this section and no additional fee will be required. 
(d)  If the preliminary plat application package is complete, it will be accepted by the community development director or his designee; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the community development director and city engineer shall have at least 21 working days for review of the preliminary plat, and preparation of review comments. 
(e)  If it is concluded that the preliminary plat is not acceptable, the preliminary plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at subsection (b) of this section and a new plat review fee will be required. 
(f)  After the preliminary plat application has been reviewed by community development director, the preliminary plat submittal shall then be placed on the agenda for the next regularly occurring planning and zoning commission meeting. If the planning and zoning commission approves the preliminary plat, it shall be forwarded to the developer and he will be authorized to proceed with the preparation of construction plans that will be based on the approved preliminary plat and be in accordance with all conditions and agreements included in the commission's action to approve the preliminary plat. 
(g)  The community development director will sign the preliminary plat certification after receiving planning and zoning commission approval. 
(Code 2004, § 155.48; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-104. - Preliminary plat certifications. 
(a)  Preliminary plat, owner's certification. 
I hereby submit this preliminary plat as the owner, or his authorized agent, of all property shown thereon. 
Signature of owner or authorized agent; Date 
Printed name of owner or authorized agent; Title 
(b)  Preliminary plat, designer's certification. 
I hereby certify that the plans for the proposed subdivision shown on this preliminary Plat were prepared by me or under my direct supervision. 
Signature; Date 
Georgia Registered Landscape Architect No.; or 
Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No.; or 
Georgia Registered Civil Engineer No.; (Seal) 
(c)  Preliminary plat, conformance with concept plat. 
I hereby certify that this proposed preliminary plat conforms to the approved concept plat and the requirements of the other development codes and ordinances of the city. 
City Manager; Date 
City Engineer; Date 
(d)  Preliminary plat approval. 
All requirements of the city relative to the preparation and submission of this preliminary plat have been fulfilled and approval of this plat is hereby granted. This approval expires in 365 days from this date if the owner/developer fails to secure final plat approval by that time. However, the city manager may extend the approval if provided with compelling information from the developer. 
City manager; Date 
Acknowledged by: 
Owner/Developer; Date 
(Code 2004, § 155.49; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-105—114-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - THE CONSTRUCTION PLANS 

Sec. 114-122. - Purpose of the construction plans. 
The purpose of the construction plan is to provide all the detailed engineering information necessary to actually build the proposed subdivision in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and all the other development codes and ordinances of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to approve the format and content of the plans and specifications, and to determine what supplemental information shall be required to ensure proper construction of the project. 
(Code 2004, § 155.55; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-123. - Construction plans specifications. 
The construction plans for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. The sheet size shall not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches, and the minimum sheet size shall be 17 inches by 22 inches. At a minimum, the following information and materials should be provided as a part of the construction plans application package: 
(1)  One copy of an accurate and up-to-date boundary survey of the property proposed for subdivision; 
(2)  One copy of a completed construction plan application form; 
(3)  Six copies of the construction plans drawn clearly and accurately by a design professional at a scale appropriate for the nature of the project, to include: 
(4)  Name of subdivision; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner/developer of the property; 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the professional engineer who prepared the plans; 
(7)  Name, address and telephone number of the designated 24-hour contact person for the project; 
(8)  Date plans were prepared, north arrow and graphic scale on all appropriate sheets; 
(9)  Location map at a scale of 600 feet to the inch; 
(10)  An accurate list of conditions relative to the zoning of the property and the approval of the concept plat and preliminary plat; 
(11)  Pertinent site development data; 
(12)  Boundary lines of the overall property perimeter showing bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines and the bearing and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The source of boundary information shall be shown. The boundary survey shall be tied to the state plain coordinate system at two locations along the boundary. Horizontal control point coordinates shall be indicated on the construction plans; 
(13)  Current field-run topography with mean sea level contours at intervals no greater than two feet. The source of topographic information shall be shown. The topographic survey shall be tied to USGS elevation benchmark referenced to mean sea level and an elevation benchmark shall be indicated on the construction plans; 
(14)  Accurate locations of all natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, state waters, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other significant features. The source of floodplain information shall be shown. In addition, the petitioner must provide a copy of the wetland delineation that has been approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(15)  Detailed limits of clearing and plan for tree protection; 
(16)  Detailed erosion and sediment control plans; 
(17)  Detailed grading and drainage and stormwater management plans; 
(18)  Detailed electric and natural gas utility plans; 
(19)  Detailed roadway and sidewalk plans; 
(20)  Detailed storm sewer plans; 
(21)  Detailed water utility plans; 
(22)  Detailed sanitary sewer plans; 
(23)  Detailed plans for all amenities, parks, and/or open spaces; 
(24)  Detailed plans for all telecommunications; and 
(25)  Such other information as may be required by the city to fully evaluate and review the project. 
(Code 2004, § 155.56; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-124. - Construction plan review process. 
(a)  The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the community development director to discuss what is required for construction plan approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the community development director two complete construction plan application packages. 
(c)  The construction plan application package shall be carefully checked by the community development director or designated development coordinator to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with subsection (b) of this section and no additional fee will be required. 
(d)  If the construction plan application package is complete, it will be accepted by the community development director or his designee; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the city shall have at least 28 working days for review of the construction plans, and preparing comments. 
(e)  The city shall approve two identical sets of plans, one for the developer and one for the city. The developer shall then make five copies of the approved set for the city, along with one 11-inch by 17-inch set. The developer shall keep one copy of the approved set on the construction site at all times. 
(f)  Permits and approvals. 
(1)  Upon request, after approval on the construction plans, the city shall issue a site construction permit which will allow the developer to begin construction at the site. The city will issue this permit only after the developer has obtained an approved erosion sedimentation and pollution control (ES&PC) plan from the state environmental protection division. A fee is required for this site construction permit. 
(2)  The developer is required to obtain all necessary permits and approvals from all federal, state and local regulatory agencies and evidence of same shall be furnished to the city. After providing this information and obtaining construction plan approval from the city, the city will issue a site construction permit and after that time, construction at a site may proceed. 
(g)  Upon completion of construction of infrastructure, the developer shall notify the city and the city will inspect the construction to determine if the construction conforms to the minimum construction standards adopted by the city. In addition, the city will determine whether or not the site has been developed in accordance with the approved plans. Also, the developer shall submit for review and approval all test results and certifications that are required to demonstrate satisfactory construction and adherence to all codes, ordinances and development standards. On the basis of the site inspection and the review of the supporting documentation, the city shall determine whether or not the construction work is acceptable. This determination shall be made within 15 working days of the request. If it is determined that the construction is satisfactory, the city will authorize the preparation of a final plat. 
(h)  If the construction is not approved, the developer shall be informed of deficiencies noted in writing and what needs to be done to secure approval. After the developer has completed corrective measures necessary to address comments, the developer will notify the city in writing and then the activities outlined in subsection (g) of this section will be repeated until the development is deemed satisfactory. For each inspection or re-inspection a fee shall be required. 
(i)  Notes. 
(1)  If the developer wishes to make any substantive change to the construction plans at any time during the process, that change must first be approved in writing by the community development director or his designee in accordance with the construction plan review process. If the change proposed modifies the layout of the development, the developer will be required to stop work and resubmit a preliminary plat and construction plans for approval by the city before proceeding further on the project. 
(2)  Staff inspections will be performed on a regular basis during the construction process to ensure conformance with the approved plans and specifications 
(Code 2004, § 155.57; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-125. - Construction plans certification. 
(a)  Construction plans, engineer's certification of design. 
I hereby certify that the design of stormwater and drainage facilities including culverts, drainage structures and detention or retention ponds and appurtenances; the design of roadways and streets; and the design of water system facilities including pipelines, fire hydrants, valves and appurtenances, sanitary sewerage facilities including gravity sewer pipelines, force mains, manholes and appurtenances was prepared under my direct supervision and is in strict accordance with the development regulations and standard specifications of the city of Harlem, Georgia. 
Signature of Engineer of Record; Date 
Printed Name; (Seal) 
(b)  Construction plans approval, city engineer. 
To the best of my knowledge, all requirements of the city relative to the preparation and submission of these plans and specifications have been fulfilled and approval is hereby granted subject to the conditions stipulated below: 
City Engineer; Date 
(c)  Construction plans approval, community development director. 
These construction plans have been reviewed and found to be in accordance with the approved concept plat and the approved preliminary plat, and any zoning conditions that may have been previously imposed on the property. 
City Manager; Date 
(Code 2004, § 155.58; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-126—114-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - THE FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 114-149. - Purpose of the final plat. 
The purpose of the final plat of a subdivision is to present an accurate depiction of the layout of the subdivision that has been constructed so that it can be properly recorded and then used as a permanent reference for the sale of the property included within the subdivision. 
(Code 2004, § 155.65; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-150. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Sheet size shall be 18 inches by 24 inches. 
(b)  The final plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delimiting the entirety of the property contained within the final plat, and tied in at least two locations to the state plain coordinate system. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 10,000 and shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
(c)  The final plat shall conform to the approved concept plat and preliminary plat and it may constitute only a portion of the approved concept plat, which the subdivider proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this division, and said portion is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the approved concept plat and/or preliminary plat shall require revision and reapproval of both the concept plat and/or the preliminary plat. At a minimum, the following information and materials should be provided as a part of the final plat application package: 
(1)  One copy of an accurate and up-to-date boundary survey of the property proposed for subdivision; 
(2)  One copy of a completed final plat application form; 
(3)  Six copies of the final plat drawn clearly and accurately by a design professional at a scale appropriate for the nature of the project; 
(4)  Name of the subdivision and unit or phase number, if any; 
(5)  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider; 
(6)  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the portion of the subdivision depicted on the final plat; 
(7)  Date of plat and survey, north point and graphic scale; 
(8)  Subdivision location including land lot and land district, area in acres, internal and abutting zoning, proposed number of lots and area represented in tabular format showing associated square footage; 
(9)  A location sketch or vicinity map positioning the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to recognized permanent landmarks. The location sketch scale shall be drawn at a scale of 600 feet to the inch; 
(10)  Field-run boundary survey of the subdivision property perimeter showing actual bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines, and the bearing and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The boundary information shall be tied and related to the state plane coordinates system, 1983 North American Datum, Georgia, east zone. Horizontal coordinates tied to this coordinate system shall be indicated on at least two boundary corners of the property. In addition, an elevation benchmark based on a USGS control monument tied to mean sea level, shall be shown on the final plat. All elevations provided on the final plat shall be mean sea level elevations; 
(11)  Municipal or county jurisdictional lines tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision; land lot or land district lines traversing or adjoining the subdivision shall also be indicated; 
(12)  Locations, widths, and names of all streets within and immediately adjoining the plat and all other public or utilities easements or rights-of-way; 
(13)  Street center/lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data including radii, chord lengths, and bearings, lengths of arcs and tangents, and points of curvature and tangency; 
(14)  Lot lines with complete dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second, and radii, arc and chord lengths, and chord bearings of rounded corners; 
(15)  Building setback lines with dimensions. When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown; 
(16)  Lots numbered in numerical order, blocks lettered alphabetically, with street names and addresses as established by the city; 
(17)  Location, material and size of all drainage pipes, location and type of all drainage system appurtenances such as catch basins, headwalls and inlets, location and extent of detention ponds with 100-year event level noted, the location, material and size of all city water and sewer mains and appurtenances, the location of all fire hydrants, and the location, width and purpose of any easements, including slope easements; 
(18)  Location of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE) delineated wetlands and marshlands shall be indicated on the final plat; 
(19)  Location of any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations, Location of any areas to be reserved by private deed covenant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowner's association; 
(20)  A statement of private covenants, if any, and if they are brief enough to be put directly on the final plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: "This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ________, which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded on ________"; 
(21)  Accurate location, material, and description of property corner or line monuments or markers. All monuments and markers shall be in place prior to approval of the final plat; 
(22)  Extent and elevation of the 100-year floodplain within the subdivision. When floodplain is present, a chart giving the areas within and outside of the floodplain for each lot containing any portion of the floodplain shall be on the final plat. The origin of the floodplain data shall be indicated. The minimum finished floor elevation (three feet above the 100-year flood elevation) for sites adjacent to the floodplain shall be indicated on the plat for each lot; 
(23)  Individual lots, which are deemed by the community development director or his designee as requiring site plans, shall be designated in a readily identifiable manner; and 
(24)  Certificates and statements specified in these regulations. 
(Code 2004, § 155.66; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-151. - Final plat, supplemental information. 
The following supplemental information shall be required for each final plat: 
(1)  A maintenance bond warranting workmanship and covering damages for a period not less than two years from the date the final plat is recorded. 
(2)  As-built construction plans in both a paper and electronic format, showing all infrastructure installation details, and certified by the engineer of record. 
(Code 2004, § 155.67; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-152. - Final plat review process. 
(a)  The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the community development director to discuss what is required for final plat approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the community development director two complete final plat application packages. 
(c)  The final plat application package shall be carefully checked by the community development director to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with subsection (b) of this section and no additional fee will be required. 
(d)  If the final plat application package is complete, it will be accepted by the community development director; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the community development director shall have at least 15 working days for review of the final plat, and preparing comments. 
(e)  If the community development director concludes the final plat is not acceptable, the final plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at subsection (b) of this section and a new plat review fee will be required. 
(f)  If after review of the submitted final plat the community development director approves the final plat, it shall be placed on the next regularly scheduled meeting agenda for the planning and zoning commission and forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for action at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda for the planning and zoning meeting is established two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date. 
(g)  Prior to recording the final plat, the developer shall provide to the community development director a complete and accurate set of as-built drawings in both paper and electronic form. These as-built drawings must be approved by the city prior to approval of the final plat. 
(h)  Prior to recording the final plat, the developer shall complete all required improvements. The city may allow for sidewalks to be installed at the time building permits are issued as a requirement of the development. However, installation of sidewalks and other pedestrian paths adjacent to public amenities shall be installed in conjunction with said amenities construction. In regards to the installation of landscaping for the public areas, those improvements must also be inspected and approved by the city. If for any reason it is not possible or practical for the developer to be able to complete the landscape work within a reasonable period of time, the developer may post a cash bond or acceptable performance bond, the amount of which shall be determined by the city, pending the satisfactory completion of the work. 
(i)  Prior to recording the final plat, the developer must post with the city an acceptable maintenance bond to guarantee the quality and workmanship of the required improvements for a period of not less than two years following the date the final plat is actually recorded. 
(Code 2004, § 155.68; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-153. - Final plat certifications. 
(a)  Final plat surveyor's certification. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future" and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown: This plat conforms to all requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. By: 
Signature of Registered Georgia Land Surveyor; Date 
Printed Name; No. 
(Seal) 
(b)  Engineer's certification. 
I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge this subdivision was substantially constructed in accordance with the construction plans and specifications which were approved by the city engineer, as well as any approved revisions thereto, and that all applicable engineering requirements of the land subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance have been fulfilled, except as noted below: 
Signature of Engineer of Record; Date 
Printed Name; No. 
(Seal) 
(c)  Final plat approval certification. 
This final plat has been prepared in accordance with the approved concept plat, the approved preliminary plat, the approved construction plans, and the other development codes and ordinances of the city, and has been approved by the city for recording in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Columbia County. 
City Engineer; Date 
City Clerk; Date 
City Manager; Date 
(d)  Maintenance guarantee. 
The undersigned, its successors and assignees, hereby warrants and guarantees to the city the full and complete maintenance of a certain improvement known as and more particularly shown in plat book, page(s) _____, of the Columbia County Records. 
This warranty and guarantee is made in accordance with the city Subdivision Regulations and Development Regulations. This guarantee includes not only paving, but also, all other appurtenant structures and amenities lying within the right-of-way of said road and in the buffer areas, including, but not limited to, all curbing, drainage pipes, culverts, catch basins, drainage ditches, and pedestrian walks. Utilities owned and operated by a governmental body or public utility company shall be the responsibility of said governmental body or public utility company and not the developer. 
The developer shall correct and repair or cause to be corrected and repaired all damages to said improvements resulting from any cause whatsoever. In the event the developer fails to correct any damages within 30 calendar days after written notice thereof, then said damages may be corrected by the city and all costs and charges billed to and paid by the developer; but this remedy shall not limit the city, and it shall also have any remedies available to it as approved by law. 
The terms of this agreement shall be for a period of two years beginning on the date of written acceptance of said improvements by the city as evidenced by the final plat approval of said completed improvements. 
After the termination of said two-year period the city shall be responsible to the citizens of the city for the maintenance of said improvements as provided by law. No roadway and associated right-of-way shall be accepted by the city for maintenance unless it scores 90 or above on the city's asphalt pavement rating form. Provided, however, any damages which occurred prior to the end of said two-year period and which still are unrepaired at the termination of said period shall remain the responsibility of the developer (written notice of said damages must be given prior to the time the two-year period ends). 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the developer has caused this Agreement to be executed by its duly authorized officers this ___ day of ___________, ___. 
Owner/Developer Title; Date 
(Seal) 
Notary Public State of Georgia; (Seal) 
(e)  Certificate of dedication. 
State of Georgia 
County of Columbia 
The owner of the land shown on this plat acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and for value received, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, does hereby convey in fee simple to the city of Harlem, Georgia, and further dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets and rights-of-way, pedestrian walks, watercourses, drains, easements, greenbelts and public places shown hereon, except those easements designated on this plat as other utility company easements, and except those streets specifically designated on this plat as private streets. 
In consideration of the approval of this final plat and other valuable considerations, the owners do hereby agree to hold the city of Harlem, Georgia, harmless for a five-year period from any and all monetary liabilities which may arise from any and all claims, damages, or demands arising on account of the design and construction of public improvements of the property shown herein, to include, but not be limited to, the roads, streets, fills, embankments, ditches, cross drains, culverts and bridges within the proposed right-of-way shown, resulting from any and all causes other than by an act of the city of Harlem, Georgia. 
And further, the owner warrants that he owns fee simple title to the property shown hereon and agrees that the city shall not be liable to the undersigned or subsequent owners in title for a period of five years for any claim of damages resulting from negligence in exercising engineering techniques and due caution in the construction of cross drains extension, drives, structures or buildings, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers and any other matter whatsoever on private property. Any and all monetary liability occurring under this paragraph shall be the liability of the owner. I further warrant that I have the right to convey said land according to this plat and do hereby bind myself and the owners subsequent in title to defend the covenants and agreements set out. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set by hand and affixed my seal this day of ___________, 20___. 
Owner/Developer; Date 
Title; (Seal) 
Notary Public State of Georgia; (Seal) 
(Code 2004, § 155.69; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Secs. 114-154—114-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 114-175. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the community development director, or his designated representative, to administer, interpret and enforce these regulations. 
(Code 2004, § 155.75; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-176. - Fees. 
The fees for reviewing plats and plans in accordance with these regulations are established and periodically updated by the city manager. A copy of the current fee schedule is available upon request from the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 155.76; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-177. - Forms and instructions. 
Application forms and instructions for preparing and processing plats and plans in accordance with these regulations are periodically updated. Current copies of these forms and instructions are available upon request from the community development director. 
(Code 2004, § 155.77; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-178. - Enforcement. 
In any instance where activities are undertaken in violation of this article, the community development director is hereby authorized to stop all unauthorized work, direct correction of deficiencies, and take any other legal or administrative action necessary to achieve compliance. 
(Code 2004, § 155.78; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-179. - Appeals. 
A decision of the community development director concerning the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of these regulations may be appealed to the planning commission within ten calendar days of that decision. Appeals may be made by an affected owner/developer or by any legal resident of the city who feels he has been adversely affected by that decision. All appeals shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the city and shall include a fee established by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 155.79; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 114-180. - Certiorari from decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision on an appeal shall have the right of appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 calendar days after that decision is rendered by the planning commission 
(Code 2004, § 155.80; Ord. No. 1710, 7-24-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of sections of the 2004 Code, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2004 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2004 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 2004 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions that are included herein. Legislation not listed herein has been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia. 

 