CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CLARKSTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER  AND  GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, May 4, 1981  Effective, July 1, 1981 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1981  Republished by Order of the City Council, 2004 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS  OF THE  CITY OF CLARKSTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Lee Swaney  Mayor 
____________ 
William (Bill) Kemp  Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Pat Davis-Morris  Wayne Foster  William (Bill) Kemp  Rosemarie Nelson  Hien Nguyen  Joyce Wade  City Council 
____________ 
Carole Keys  City Clerk 
____________ 
Jack Rhodes  City Attorney 
OFFICIALS  OF THE  CITY OF CLARKSTON, GEORGIA  AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ernest S. Whaley  Mayor 
____________ 
William H. Armistead  Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
William H. Armistead  Ernest Carroll  Harry F. Hensler  A. N. Partridge  Carroll Spivey  Bobby Wright  City Council 
____________ 
Evelyn F. Hauswirth  City Clerk 
____________ 
Stephen M. Pavuk  City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Clarkston of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. The Charter is also included. 
The Code has been republished in 2004 with the inclusion of ordinances received for codification subsequent to the publication of Supplement No. 17 to the 1981 publication, and this republication constitutes a replacement volume to the prior Code. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1968 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the second section of chapter 3 is 3-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2 and 4-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and B. Meade White, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Stephen M. Pavuk, City Attorney and Mrs. Evelyn F. Hauswirth, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. 
The republication of the Code was under the direct supervision of Robert S. Hornyak, Editor, and credit is gratefully given to other members of the publisher's staff for their able assistance throughout the project. 
May, 1981 (revised in 2004) 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 99  ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Clarkston, Georgia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Enacted and Ordained by the City Council of the City of Clarkston, and it is Ordained by Authority of Same: 
Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 20, each inclusive, in the Addendum hereto, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Clarkston, Georgia," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the City passed on or before the date specified in Section 3 hereof, to the extent provided for in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the date specified in section 9 hereof and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Clarkston, enacted on final passage on or before the date specified in subsection (n) of Section 3 hereof, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date hereof, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution not specifically mentioned is hereby repealed. 
Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City, or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City. 
(c)  Any right or franchise granted by the governing body of the city to any person, firm or corporation. 
(d)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(e)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying any tax. 
(f)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing street or sidewalk grades. 
(g)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(h)  Any ordinance establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City. 
(i)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning or rezoning any specific property. 
(j)  Any administrative ordinance of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
(k)  Any ordinance compensating city officers or employees, and not inconsistent with such Code. 
(l)  Any housing authority ordinance or resolution. 
(m)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the City, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law and is not inconsistent with such Code. 
(n)  Any ordinance enacted after July 7, 1980. 
Section 4.  That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Clarkston, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5.  That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by the City Clerk, to insert in their designated places, all ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the City Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 6.  That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Clarkston, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. 
Section 7.  Any person violating such Code shall be punished as authorized by law, as provided in section 1-7 of such Code. 
Section 8.  That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 9.  That this ordinance shall become effective on the first day of July, 1981. 
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CLARKSTON BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE OF COUNCIL AT A MEETING OF THE COUNCIL OF SAID CITY, AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF CLARKSTON, THIS FOURTH DAY OF MAY, 1981. 

ATTEST: 

(SEAL) 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 

I, Evelyn F. Hauswirth, City Clerk for the City of Clarkston, Georgia, do certify the foregoing ordinance to be a true copy as adopted by Council in regular session May 4, 1981. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
ACT NO. 597 (H.B. NO. 678) 
To reincorporate the City of Clarkston in the County of DeKalb; to create a new charter for said city; to provide for its corporate limits; to provide for the government of said city; to provide for the officials thereof, and their selection, oath, powers and duties; to provide their term of office; to provide for elections; to provide for a recorder's court in said city; to provide for its fiscal administration; to provide restrictions on actions for damages; to provide for penalties; to provide for severability; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA, AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED BY AUTHORITY OF THE SAME: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The charter consists of 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 597). Amendatory enactments are cited in parentheses following amended sections or subsections. Words in brackets have been added by the editor for clarification. Footnotes tying related portions of the charter together and references to relevant state law have been inserted by the editor for facility of usage. 

ARTICLE I. - CHARTER, CITY LIMITS AND CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - [Incorporation.] 
This Act is a charter and shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Clarkston, Georgia, repealing and replacing the charter as provided by Georgia Laws of 1914, pages 578—615, as amended. The City of Clarkston, Georgia, in the County of DeKalb, and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate by the name and style of the City of Clarkston, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal, and change it at pleasure. 
( Ord. No. 418 , § 1, 4-3-18) 
State Law reference— Method of incorporation, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-31-1, 36-35-2 et seq.; general powers, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-31-2, 36-34-1. 
Sec. 1.02. - City limits. 
Said city shall include all territory identified in any annexation enacted by the Georgia General Assembly or by ordinance of the City of Clarkston, as well as the city's original boundary described as follows: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the County of DeKalb, State of Georgia, embracing and including the territory as follows: One-half (½) mile in every direction from a marker at the center of the old depot site of the Georgia Railroad, said city and its territory being embraced in the circle thus traced by using one-half (½) mile as a radius and said marker at the center of said old depot site as a center. ( Ord. No. 418 , § 2, 4-3-18) 
Editor's note— The city has adopted the annexation ordinances listed in the table below, thus rendering the legal description included incomplete. The text of these ordinances is on file with the city clerk. 

 
State Law reference— Annexation of territory, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-36-1 et seq., 36-35-2. 
Sec. 1.03. - Corporate powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the city council, may include the following: 
(a)  [Levy, etc. of property taxes:] To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, reevaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
Cross reference— Property taxes, § 4.06. 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-10, title 48. 
(b)  [Levy, etc. of license taxes:] To levy and to provide for the collection of license taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 48-13-5 et seq.. 
(c)  [Levy, etc. of registration fees on motor vehicles:] To levy and to provide for the collection of registration fees on automobiles and trucks owned by residents of the city, and also on automobiles and trucks owned by non-residents and operated within the city with regularity. Such registration fees on trucks or automobiles may be graduated according to their tonnage capacities, weight or horsepower. 
(d)  [ Appropriations, borrowing, expenditures, bond issuance: ] To appropriate and borrow money to provide for payment of the debts of the city, and to authorize expenditure of money for any municipal purpose, or for matters of National or State interest, and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Cross reference— Appropriations, § 4.03. 
State Law reference— Borrowing money, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-6 et seq., 36-39-1 et seq., 36-82-1 et seq. 
(e)  [ Acquiring, etc. property: ] To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal or mixed property, inside or outside the city. 
Cross reference— See also (g) and (j) herein. 
State Law reference— Acquiring, etc. property, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-3, 36-34-5, 36-37-6, 36-37-2 et seq., 36-61-9. 
(f)  [ Condemnation of property for municipal purposes: ] To condemn property, inside or outside the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [repealed], or under other applicable public acts. 
State Law reference— Eminent domain for water and sewer systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; for urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-9; limitation on eminent domain, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
(g)  [ Acquiring, etc. public utilities: ] To acquire, construct, operate, distribute, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks and/or a natural gas system subject to the provisions of applicable general law. For water and gas furnished and for all sewerage and sanitary services rendered, said city may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service to be provided and shall have a lien against any property of the persons served; said lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
(h)  [ Public utility and public service franchises and contracts: ] To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of fifty (50) years. The council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor. 
State Law reference— Authority to grant franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 
(i)  [ Regulating public utilities: ] To regulate the rates and services of public utilities insofar as not in conflict with such regulation by the Georgia Public Service Commission or other similar State or Federal agency having jurisdiction in such matters. 
(j)  [ Acquisition, etc. of public ways, parks, etc.: ] To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia [repealed] or other applicable public acts. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-3 et seq.; 36-39-1 et seq.; 36-37-2 et seq., 36-64-1 et seq. 
(k)  [ Requiring correction of unsafe condition of real estate: ] To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition, the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so. 
(l)  [ Standards of health and sanitation: ] To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-16, 36-34-4. 
(m)  [ Disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse: ] To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse. Charges may be imposed to cover the costs of such services which, if unpaid, shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner, and under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes. 
State Law reference— Litter control law, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq.; solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
(n)  [ Prohibiting detrimental acts, etc.: ] To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the city. 
(o)  [ Nuisances: ] To define a nuisance in the City and to provide for its abatement consistent with standards and procedures established by general law. 
State Law reference— Authority as to nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
(p)  [ Building, etc. standards: ] To establish minimum standards for, and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. This subsection does not apply to work done by and for public utilities. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
(q)  [ Weights and measures: ] To regulate and license weights and measures. 
(r)  [ Commitment of prisoners: ] To provide that persons given jail sentences by the municipal court may be committed to the DeKalb County jail to serve their sentence pursuant to agreement with the appropriate County officers. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal court, O.C.G.A. §§ 17-7-22, 36-32-3, 36-32-5; defining criminal offenses by city, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
(s)  [ Regulating, etc. animals and fowl: ] To regulate and license, or prohibit, the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane killing, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3. 
(t)  [ Regulating, etc. vehicles for hire: ] To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles. 
(u)  [ Assessments for public improvements: ] To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments for public improvements. 
State Law reference— Public improvements, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-3 et seq., 36-39-1 et seq. 
(v)  [ Providing for punishment of violators: ] To provide that the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
(w)  [ Plenary powers, etc.: ] To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in the Act as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Act shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the constitution or application public acts of the State. 
State Law reference— Powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq. 
(x)  [ Compelling removal, etc. of facilities of public service corporations: ] To compel any and all public service corporations operating or doing business in said city to remove and replace and readjust at their own expense all tracks, poles, conduits, wires and other appurtenances and structures used by them in the prosecution of their business functions, when ever the same may, in the discretion of the city council, be necessary to carry out any ordinance or plan of the municipal government of the City of Clarkston, or to the best interests of the city or its inhabitants. 
State Law reference— Regulation, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-10, 36-34-2. 
(y)  [ Requiring railroad street crossing repair, etc.: ] To require the railroads or street railroads running through said town or a portion thereof, to make and repair such public crossings for pedestrians or vehicles over or across their several roads whenever or in such a manner as said mayor and council shall deem necessary; to place or repair such crossings, or to open or keep open any street in said town crossing them, and the mayor and council may pass any ordinance needful for carrying out the provisions of this section. And in case any railroad or street railroad shall fail or refuse to make such crossings within fifteen (15) days or to repair the same within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by said city, the mayor and council shall have the power to create and make the same across the railroad or street railroad, and to repair the same at the expense of said railroad or street railroad, and may issue execution therefor, and levy and collect the same as in the case of tax executions. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-10, 36-34-2. 
(z)  [ Advertising of city: ] To make appropriations and payments from the general funds of the city for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital and commercial and manufacturing and other enterprises into the city, and also for making contributions to any board of trade or chamber of commerce or like body in said city, or DeKalb County, which may have for its object any of the above stated public purposes, and also to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals, libraries; charities and other eleemosynary institutions in the city. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 1, 1-3-17 ; Ord. No. 418 , § 3, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 1.04. - [Continuation in effect of] ordinances. 
All ordinances, by-laws, rules and regulations, now in force in said city, not inconsistent with this Act, are hereby declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the mayor and council of said city. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.01. - Election of mayor and council members. 
The person serving as mayor and the council members serving on the effective date of this section shall continue to serve for the remainder of their terms and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 2011, and quadrennially thereafter, there shall be an election to elect the successors to the three council members whose terms expire at the end of that year. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 2013, and quadrennially thereafter, there shall be an election to elect the mayor and the successors to the three council members whose terms expire at the end of that year. The candidate for mayor receiving a majority of votes cast shall be elected mayor. The candidates for council members receiving the greatest, second greatest, and third greatest number of votes cast for council members shall be elected. Elections shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21, the Georgia Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 75, 8-2-76; Ga. Laws, 2010, Act. No. 534 (House Bill No. 1507), § 2; Ord. No. 418 , § 4, 4-3-18) 
Cross reference— Qualifications for mayor and councilmen, § 2-08. 
State Law reference— The date of municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9; authority to designate precincts, §§ O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260; authority to appoint managers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90; managers and clerks to be sworn, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-93; challenging voters, O.C.G.A. 21-2-229; contest procedure, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-520 ert seq.; authority to regulate absentee voting, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; absentee voting procedure, § 21-3-80 et seq. 
Sec. 2.02. - City council. 
(a)  The mayor and six (6) council members shall compose the city council, in which is vested all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Act. The council shall be the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members. 
(b)  The compensation of the mayor and council members shall be as prescribed by ordinance; provided that salary changes enacted shall not become effective during the term of the council enacting such change, consistent with state general law. The council members and mayor shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(c)  The city council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place, as provided by ordinances. The council shall meet in special session on written call of any two (2) council members, upon twenty-four (24) hours notice to the public pursuant to State general law and notice served on the other council members personally or left at their residences at least twelve (12) hours in advance of the meeting. But such notice to council members of a special meeting shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. The mayor may also call a special meeting, pursuant to the procedures just set forth, with the written consent of two council members. During a state of emergency or disaster declared by the governor or his/her designee, the mayor may call a special meeting pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54 upon providing such notice to the council members as may be possible under the circumstances. Only the business stated in the written call may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. 
(d)  The city council shall exercise its powers in public meetings. Any four (4) members of the city council shall constitute a quorum. For the purposes of determining a quorum only, the mayor shall count as a member of the city council. The council may, by ordinance, adopt rules and by-laws to govern the conduct of its business; including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. 
(e)  By a majority vote of a quorum of the city council, the council may subpoena and examine witnesses, may order the production of books and papers, and may punish for refusal to obey such an order or subpoena, or for disorderly or contemptuous behavior in the presence of the council. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 2, 1-3-17 ; Ord. No. 418 , § 5, 4-3-18) 
Code reference— For present salaries, see §§ 2-2 and 2-3. 
State Law reference— Rights and liabilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4 et seq., authority to fix salaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2.03. - Mayor as presiding officer; veto power. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council; shall have a vote in case of a tie in any vote of the city council; shall be the ceremonial head of the city; shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; shall sign deeds, bonds, and contracts when authorized by the council to do so; shall be the officer to accept process against the city; and shall perform other duties imposed by this Charter and by ordinances not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the power to veto official acts of the city council. The mayor shall have five days after meetings of the council in which to file with the clerk in writing his/her dissent, but the city council may pass the ordinance, order, or resolution, notwithstanding the veto, by an affirmative vote of four (4) council members, to be taken by ayes and nays, and entered upon the minutes. 
(Ga. Laws, 2010, Act No. 534 (House Bill No. 1507); Ord. No. 418 , § 6, 4-3-18) 
Cross reference— Administrative duties of mayor, § 3.02. 
Sec. 2.04. - Vice-mayor. 
The city council, at its January regular meeting, shall elect from its membership a vice-mayor for a term of one year. In the event that no decision is reached at such regular meeting; the council shall, within five (5) ballots to be taken within ten (10) days following such meeting, elect the vice-mayor; otherwise the council member who received the highest number of votes, when he/she was last elected, shall become vice-mayor. The vice-mayor shall perform the duties of the mayor during his/her absence or inability to act, and shall fill out any unexpired term in the office of mayor, unless and until the position is filled by special election. If the vice- mayor fills a vacancy in the office of mayor, a new vice-mayor shall be elected by majority vote of the council. ( Ord. No. 418 , § 7, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 2.05. - Vacancy in office of mayor or council member. 
(a)  A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a council member resigns, dies, moves his or her residence from the city, has been continuously disabled for a period of six (6) months so as to prevent him or her from discharging the duties of office, shall have engaged in any activity or done any act which under the laws of this state would preclude him or her from continuing to serve as an elected official, or shall have been removed from office by the electorate as provided by law. Such vacancy shall be declared by the mayor unless it shall be the office of mayor which is vacant, and in such case by the vice-mayor. Such declaration shall be made in a regular meeting of the city council and shall be affirmed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(b)  Should a vacancy occur in the office of mayor, the vice mayor shall assume the duties of the mayor until an election is held pursuant to this subsection. If a regular municipal election to elect a mayor will occur within one hundred eighty (180) days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of mayor, then the vice-mayor shall complete the vacant mayor's term. If no such regular election is scheduled, a special election to elect a mayor to fill out the vacant mayor's term shall be held. If required, such special election shall be held not less than sixty (60) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that a vacancy in the office of mayor is declared and in any event on a date provided for by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540(c). If more than one (1) date provided for by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540(c) meets the terms of this charter provision, then the city council shall select the date of the special election by resolution. 
(c)  If the vacancy occurs in the office of council member and if a regular municipal election will occur for the council seat that is vacant within twelve (12) months of the date of the declaration of such vacancy, then the city council may appoint a qualified person to complete the unexpired term of the vacant council member. Upon declaration of a vacancy in the office of council member, if it shall be more than twelve (12) months to the next regular municipal election for the council seat that is vacant, a special election shall be held to fill the vacancy. If required, such special election shall be held not less than sixty (60) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that a vacancy in the office of council member is declared and in any event on a date provided for by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540(c). If more than one (1) date provided for by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540(c) meets the terms of this charter provision, then the city council shall select the date of the special election by resolution. 
(Ga. Laws, 1997, Act No. 26 (House Bill No. 341); Ord. No. 362, §§ 1, 2, 8-8-11; Ord. No. 418 , § 2, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 2.06. - City clerk. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk, who shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the council; attending meetings of the council and keeping a journal of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the title of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by the council or mayor. Salary of the city clerk and his term of office shall be as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2.07. - City legislation. 
Any action of the council, having a regulatory or penal effect, or required to be done by ordinance under this Act, shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of a majority of those council members present and voting shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance; provided however, that no resolution or ordinance may pass with less than three (3) affirmative votes. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1, 7-6-04) 
Sec. 2.08. - Qualifications for mayor and council members. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor or council member, a person must meet the requirements of a qualified elector for members of the General Assembly as prescribed by state law, must have been a bona fide resident of the City of Clarkston for one (1) year next preceding the election in which he/she offers as a candidate, and must have no debts outstanding against him/her in favor of the city, county or state. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 1, 7-2-13; Ord. No. 418 , § 9, 4-3-18) 
State Law reference— Disqualification, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-504, 45-2-1; nominations, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-130. 
Sec. 2.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws, 2010, Act. No. 534 (House Bill 1507), § 3, repealed former § 2.09 in its entirety which pertained to eligible voters and voter registration. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL 

Sec. 3.01. - Organization. 
The city manager shall organize the departments, agencies and staff of the city and designate the duties, responsibilities and positions of employees of the city in the manner that will provide for the most efficient and effective administration of city business and effectuate the policies established by the city council. ( Ord. No. 418 , § 10 4-3-18) 
Sec. 3.02. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation; removal; vacancy, powers; council interference. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
(b)  The city manager is employed and terminable pursuant to the terms of a written employment contract to be entered into between the city and the city manager. 
(c)  The mayor shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. 
(d)  The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, officers, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager may not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council. The mayor and council members may submit recommendations prior to the city manager's submission of these budgets. 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(e)  Except for the purpose of official investigations, the mayor and members of the city council shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor, the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ga. Laws, 2010, Act. No. 534 (House Bill 1507), § 4; Ord. No. 361, § 1, 7-5-11); ( Ord. No. 418 , §§ 11, 12 4-3-18) 
Sec. 3.03. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a part; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; shall approve as to form and legality all contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions having the force of law. ( Ord. No. 418 , § 13, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 3.04. - Municipal Court—Appointment of judge. 
The City of Clarkston Municipal Court shall be presided over by a qualified judge appointed by the city council on an annual basis. Such judge shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council and may be removed by the city council pursuant to standards and procedures established by general law. 
( Ord. No. 385, § 1, 1-6-15 ; Ord. No. 403, § 3, 1-3-17 ) 
State Law reference— Appointment of judge authorized notwithstanding local act, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 3.05. - Convening of municipal court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as may be designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the municipal court judge to dispose of the business of the court or both. The court shall sit at Clarkston City Hall or at such other place within the City of Clarkston as may be designated by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
( Ord. No. 385, § 1, 1-6-15 ) 
Sec. 3.06. - Municipal court jurisdiction and powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violators for crimes defined by state law where jurisdiction over the prosecution of such crimes is conveyed to the municipal court by general law and shall try and punish violators for violation of city ordinances. Where state law or the applicable city ordinance does not fix the punishment for an offense, the municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for six (6) months, or both. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence, or so near thereto as to affect its operation, for contempt. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to state or superior courts for violation of state law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to insure the presence of those charged with violations and may prescribe the conditions for forfeiture of the same. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to administer oaths and perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer so authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 267a, § 1, 3-4-03; Ord. No. 385, § 1, 1-6-15 ; Ord. No. 403, § 4, 1-3-17 ) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-3, 36-32-5, 40-13-20, 40-13-21, 40-13-29; authority to bind over or commit, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22. 
Sec. 3.07. - Municipal court records. 
The city manager shall appoint a municipal court clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The municipal court clerk shall be responsible for keeping such records of proceedings of the municipal court as shall be necessary to a full understanding of the charge, evidence and disposition of each case that comes before the municipal court. 
( Ord. No. 385, § 1, 1-6-15 ) 
Sec. 3.08. - Certiorari to the municipal court. 
Certiorari from the Superior Court of DeKalb County to the Municipal Court of Clarkston shall lie pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 385, § 1, 1-6-15 ) 
Sec. 3.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 385, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2015 , repealed former § 3.09 in its entirety which pertained to procedure of the former mayor's court and derived from the charter enacted by Act. No. 597. 
Sec. 3.10. - Other officers and employees. 
The city manager may establish such offices and positions of employment within the city as may be necessary and appropriate for the effective and efficient administration of the city's affairs. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 5, 1-3-17 ) 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 36-35-4. 
Sec. 3.11. - Oath of office. 
Before a person takes any office in the city government, he shall take before an officer of this state, authorized to administer oaths, the following oath or affirmation: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; that I will in all respects, observe the provisions of the charter and ordinances of the City of Clarkston, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ____________ . So help me God." 
State Law reference— Required oath, O.C.G.A. §§ 45-3-9. 
Sec. 3.12. - Political activity prohibited; unpaid leave of absence. 
No officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor and council members, shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any city or other public office, unless such officer or employee shall first obtain, by resolution of the city council, a grant of unpaid leave status for the duration of such candidacy. 
(Ord. No. 330, 6-3-08) 
Sec. 3.13. - Personal financial interest. 
Any city officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer or employee who wilfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or wilfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the mayor or the city council. 
State Law reference— Abuse of public office, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. §§ 45-10-1, 45-10-2. 
Sec. 3.14. - City planning and renewal. 
The council may by ordinance establish a planning department, appoint a director, planning board, and board of adjustments to advise, formulate and effect a comprehensive plan and modifications thereof for the physical development of the city, and by ordinance adopt land use and development regulations, including but not limited to an official map, zoning and subdivision regulations, and provide for redevelopment, rehabilitation, conservation and renewal programs for: (1) the alleviation or prevention of slums, obsolescence, blight or other conditions of deterioration, and (2) the achievement of the most appropriate use of land as now or hereafter may be provided by the general laws of Georgia. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public revenue, O.C.G.A. title. 48; investment, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of January and shall end on the thirty-first day of December of each year, but a different fiscal year may be fixed by ordinance for the entire city government or for any utility. 
Sec. 4.02. - City manager to submit annual budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the next fiscal year, showing separately for the general fund, each utility, and each other fund the following: (i) revenues and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year, (ii) appropriations and estimated revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year, (iii) estimated revenues and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year, (iv) a comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the preceding year and estimated assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, and (v) such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the city manager or requested by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 6, 1-3-17 ) 
Sec. 4.03. - Action by council on budget. 
Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year the council shall adopt an appropriate [3] ordinance, based on the city manager's budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. Appropriations need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department and agency. The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property or lives of the inhabitants of the city; providing the council unanimously agrees that there is such an emergency. If conditions prevent the adoption of an appropriation ordinance, before the beginning of the new fiscal year, the appropriations for the last fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the new fiscal year, subject to amendment as provided by an ordinance specifically passed for such purpose. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 7, 1-3-17 ) 
Cross reference— Authority to make appropriations, § 1.03(d). 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Word "appropriate" apparently a typographical error, the word "appropriation" probably being intended. 

Sec. 4.04. - Sale of city property. 
The city council may authorize the sale of any city property which is deemed obsolete, surplus or unusable. Such sale shall be accomplished pursuant to the procedures set forth in general law for the sale of municipal property. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 8, 1-3-17 ) 
State Law reference— Requirements as to sale of city property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6. 
Sec. 4.05. - Annual audit. 
The mayor and council may employ a public accountant or a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city. The accountant shall file his report with the mayor, at a time agreed to between him and the mayor, and shall prepare a summary of the report which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilman. 
State Law reference— Uniform standards of audit, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8. 
Sec. 4.06. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes shall be subject to a property tax levied by the city. All such taxable property shall be appraised and assessed in accordance with general law and property owners shall have a right to appeal tax assessments as provided for by general law. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 9, 1-3-17) 
Cross reference— Taxing authority, § 1.03(a), (b). 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-64-10, 48-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4.07. - Tax levy. 
The city council shall make a tax levy by establishing an annual millage rate as provided for by general law. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 10, 1-3-17 ) 
Sec. 4.08. - Tax due date and tax bills. 
The due date of property taxes shall be fixed by ordinance. The city, or its designee, shall send tax bills to taxpayers, showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties. Failure to send tax bills shall not, however, invalidate any tax. Property taxes shall become delinquent forty-five (45) days after a due date; at which time a penalty not to exceed ten (10) percent in additional to a fi. fa. charge shall be added and thereafter such taxes shall be subject to interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum, from the due date until paid. On and after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the city shall have the force and effect of a judgment of a court of record. 
The city clerk is directed to post notice of this change in the legal organ of DeKalb County, Georgia once a week for three (3) weeks prior to the April meeting of the city council. This ordinance amending the Charter of the City of Clarkston shall become effective upon passage at two (2) regular consecutive meetings of the city council and upon providing notice of this change to the Clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia and to the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia as provided by law. All delinquent taxes incurred prior to passage of this amendment shall be governed by prior law. This amendment shall apply prospectively only. 
(Ord. No. 211, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 4.09. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by distress warrants issued by the mayor for the sale of goods and chattels, which are to be executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from a justice of the peace, or by the city attorney acting in accordance with general laws providing for the collection of delinquent city or county taxes, or by any two (2) or more of the foregoing methods, and by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of the first day of January of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for Federal, State or County taxes. 
Sec. 4.10. - Transfer of executions [for assessments]. 
The marshal or collecting officer of the City of Clarkston shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferer with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as now provided by law; and all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest and costs, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under tax fi. fa., as the same now exists, or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Sec. 4.11. - Special assessments. 
The city may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent thirty (30) days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten (10) percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum from due date until paid. A lien shall exist the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided in this article for city property taxes. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 5.01—5.03. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 403, § 11, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed former §§ 5.01—5.03 in their entirety. Former § 5.01 pertained to restrictions on actions for damages against city, former § 5.02 pertained to the use of general laws of the state, and § 5.03 pertained to a general penalty for violations of this Act. These former sections derived from the 1967 Charter, Act. No. 597 of the Ga. Laws. 
Sec. 5.04. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof, of this Act shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Act, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Act that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof, be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Sec. 5.05. - Specific repealer. 
An Act creating a new charter for the City of Clarkston in the County of DeKalb, approved August 12, 1914 (Ga. L. 1914, p. 578—615) is hereby repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 5.06. - Effective date. 
This Act shall be effective on and after the first day of May, 1967. 
Sec. 5.07. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - SPECIAL ACTS 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Clarkston, Georgia, and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Clarkston City Code" or the "City Code". 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject-matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter; provided, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such definition or construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Clarkston, Georgia," followed them. 
City officials, officers, employees, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, et-cetera, by title only, i.e., "mayor," "recorder," "planning commission," or any other such designation, such reference shall be deemed to be to officials et cetera of the City of Clarkston, and powers and authority granted to them shall be deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly designated subordinates. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, the first day to be counted shall be the day after the date from which said number of days is prescribed to be counted, and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, as amended, or additionally as designated by the city council, enumerating public and legal holidays, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty; however, when said following day shall be a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge such duty. 
Council, city council, governing body. Wherever the terms "council" "city council" and "governing body" are used, the same shall mean the city council of Clarkston, Georgia." 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders, including firms, partnerships and corporations as well as individuals. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The word "may" shall be deemed as permissive. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building of land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall include any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property, real estate, land. The terms "real property", "real estate" and "land" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, rights and easements of incorporated nature. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads and all other public ways in the city, and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those instances where the public records are silent, the term shall embrace all of the area between the off-street edge of the sidewalk or walkway on each side of the street, including the grassplots or other divisional areas lying between the sidewalk and walkway and street. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1, 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code, and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances, etc. 
The provisions of this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuing and superseding those ordinances and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offence or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided therefor and not otherwise limited by law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months or by work on the city work gang not exceeding six (6) months or by any combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Any such punishment shall not preclude the enforced abatement of a prohibited condition, or the pursuit of any other lawful remedy by the city. 
(Ord. No. 267a, § 2, 3-4-03) 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of mayor's court, § 3.06; authority to provide punishment for violations, § 1.03(v); authority to commit and work prisoners, § 1.03(r); punishment for contempt of court, § 3.06; punishment for violation of charter, § 5.03. 
Cross reference— Courts jurisdiction, § 7-1. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal court, O.C.G.A. §§ 17-7-22, 36-32-3, 36-32-5; defining criminal offenses by city, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert, or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Clarkston, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Organization and personnel, § 3.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— As to personnel, see Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Abuse of governmental office, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Elections. 
(a)  All city elections shall be conducted as provided in the Georgia Election Code, as amended, the same being O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., except as specifically indicated to the contrary in the City Charter or this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  DeKalb County shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified under the Georgia Election Code, with the exception of the "call" of the election, publication of the legal notices required, and the qualification of candidates. 
(c)  The mayor shall be elected by majority vote. 
(d)  The city council shall be elected by plurality vote. 
(e)  Except in elections described in section (f) below, the ballot for city council elections shall instruct the voter to vote for up to three (3) candidates. The three (3) candidates receiving the most votes shall be elected to the council. 
(f)  In special elections to fill one (1) or more vacancies on the city council, the ballot shall instruct the voter to vote for up to the number of candidates equal to the number of council seats to be filled by the election. The candidate or candidates receiving the most votes shall be elected to the vacant seat or seats. By way of example, if one (1) council seat is being filled, the candidate receiving the most votes shall be elected to the council; if two (2) council seats are being filled, the two (2) candidates receiving the most votes shall be elected to the council; and so on. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 343, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 2-2. - Compensation—Mayor. 
Effective on the first day of January, 1998, the compensation of the mayor shall be six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 1, 12-3-73; Ord. No. 96, § 1, 8-4-80; Ord. No. 204, § 1, 10-1-96) 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-3. - Compensation—City council. 
Effective on the first day of January, 1998, the compensation of the city council shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 1, 2-16-78; Ord. No. 204, § 1, 10-1-96) 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-4. - Unclaimed or abandoned property. 
(a)  Authority to sell at auction. The city shall have the authority to sell, at public outcry, to the highest bidder for cash any and all articles of personal property that have come into its hands and which, after an effort has been made to ascertain the true owner thereof without success, remain unclaimed for a period of sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Announcement to be made at sale. It shall be the duty of the auctioneer or other person holding this sale to make public announcement before opening this sale that the police department does not warrant title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either expressed or implied, as to any article sold; that all sales are final and all articles are sold "AS IS." It shall be the duty of this auctioneer or other person in charge to make this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sales. 
(Ord. No. 159, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 159a, 10-2-90) 
Sec. 2-5. - Competitive bidding. 
(a)  Whenever the city deems it necessary to acquire goods and services which will involve an expenditure in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), sealed bids shall be solicited by advertisement in a newspaper of county-wide circulation at least once and at least ten (10) days prior to the date affixed for the opening of bids and awarding of contracts. Other methods of advertisement may be used if in the city council's opinion, such efforts are more advantageous for the particular items to be purchased. If it appears that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals; 
(2)  Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bidding; 
(3)  The proposals shall be opened in the same manner as competitive sealed bids and a register of those proposals shall be prepared and made available to the public; 
(4)  The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors; 
(5)  The award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposals are determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for those proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, all contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment made under this section shall, whenever possible, be based upon competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, taking into consideration the quality of the articles to be supplied in conformity with the standard specifications which have been established and prescribed, the purposes for which the articles are required, any discounts allowed, transportation charges, and the date or dates of delivery as specified in the bid. All advertisements for the bids shall indicate the time and the place where the bids will be received, articles for which the bids shall be submitted and any standard specifications prescribed for those articles, the amount or number of the articles desired, and the amount, if any, of bonds or certified checks to accompany the bids. Under any and all circumstances, any and all bids, so received may be rejected by the city. 
(c)  If the bids received pursuant to a request for proposals or a request for sealed bids are determined by the city to be noncompetitive, or there are time or other circumstances which will not permit a delay required to re-solicit competitive bids, a contract may be negotiated provided that each responsible bidder who submitted a bid under the original solicitation is notified of the determination and given a reasonable opportunity to negotiate. 
(d)  The city shall retain every bid conforming to the terms of the advertisement and shall notify to the public in any manner the city deems appropriate the award of the contract with the name of the successful bidder indicated thereon. Such records shall be kept for public inspection upon request. 
(e)  Each sealed bid shall be signed by the party making that bid and the following oath attached thereto: 
I certify that this bid is made without prior understanding, agreement, or connection with any other corporation, firm, or person submitting the bid for the same materials, supplies, or equipment and is in all respects fair and without collusion and fraud. I agree to abide by all conditions of this bid and certify that I am authorized to sign this bid for the bidder. 
(f)  All construction or public works contracts exceeding a total expenditure of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be conducted and negotiated in accordance with this section. 
(g)  If the needed supplies, materials or equipment can be reasonably expected to be acquired for less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the purchase may be effectuated without competitive bidding. The city council, by unanimous vote at any time, may agree to suspend the requirements of this section in whole or in any part whenever the city council determines that it is in the best interest of the city that a competitive bidding or bid proposal system not be used. 
(Ord. No. 165, 3-5-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 165, adopted Mar. 5, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 2-5 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-6. - Collection of taxes and unpaid taxes. 
(a)  Ad valorem taxes due on property assessed as of January 1 of each year shall be a lien on the property as of that date and shall be due and payable to the city in two (2) equal installments, the first due July 1 and delinquent August 16 and the second due October 1 and delinquent November 16 of the year for which the taxes are assessed. 
(b)  Penalties, interest and other matters relating to delinquent taxes are assessed as set forth in the following: 
(1)  A penalty shall be assessed on all delinquent taxes equal to no more than ten (10) percent of the face amount of the tax then due. Such penalty shall be assessed on the first day such taxes become delinquent. 
(2)  All delinquent taxes and the penalty thereon shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the date said taxes become delinquent. 
(c)  Commencing on March 1 of each year, the city shall have the right to place a fi. fa. upon any property on which there are delinquent taxes for the preceding year. Thereafter, the property is subject to public sale following notice to the landowner and all others having an interest in the property as provided by law. Such tax sales shall take place on the first Tuesday of the month following notice to the landowner and public advertisement. Sales shall be conducted by the city marshall or his designee and shall take place in the place for public sales in DeKalb County, Georgia, or in the public assembly room of city hall in Clarkston, Georgia, the place of sale to be designated in the notice to parties in interest and the public advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 183, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 210, 4-1-97; Ord. No. 212, 5-6-97) 
Sec. 2-7. - Misconduct by elected officials. 
(a)  "Misconduct" Defined. "Misconduct" means any of the following enumerated actions: 
(1)  Any act that is contrary to the City Charter or city ordinance. 
(2)  Personally directing, or attempting to direct, city staff or any person acting under a contract with the city. 
(3)  Behavior unbecoming an elected representative of the city which tends to bring embarrassment or disrepute upon the city. 
(4)  Intentional violation of city council's rules of governance. 
(b)  Allegation of misconduct. When the mayor or a council member believes that another elected official has committed an act of misconduct, he or she may submit in writing to the city clerk an allegation of misconduct. Such document shall set forth with particularity the misconduct alleged. The city clerk shall promptly provide a copy of the allegation of misconduct to the mayor, all council members, the city manager and the city attorney. Such allegation of misconduct shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the date that the allegation is submitted to the city clerk. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  At the regular meeting where the allegation of misconduct appears on the agenda, the written allegation shall be read by the official making the allegation. Two (2) affirmative votes of the council shall be required to proceed with an inquiry into the alleged misconduct. 
(2)  An inquiry into alleged misconduct shall begin with the elected official that filed the allegation of misconduct presenting such witnesses, documents, or other evidence as he or she deems appropriate in support of the allegation. The accused official shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present such evidence in his or her defense as he or she desires. The mayor shall preside over the inquiry and keep order during the presentation of evidence except that, if the mayor is either the accuser or the accused, the vice mayor shall preside over the inquiry. 
(3)  At the close of an inquiry pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the city council shall be required to find the accused official guilty of misconduct. 
(4)  Upon a finding of misconduct, the city council may, by majority vote, impose a financial penalty upon the elected official found guilty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If such penalty is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall become a debt to the city within the meaning of City Charter section 2.08. 
(d)  Dismissal of allegations. If an allegation of misconduct appears on a city council agenda but a finding of misconduct is not made for any reason, then such allegation shall be dismissed with prejudice. An allegation of misconduct may not be continued, set aside, tabled, or otherwise delayed beyond the regular meeting where it first appears on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 1(Attach.), 6-4-13) 
Secs. 2-8—2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-20. - Date and time of regular meetings. 
(a)  The regular monthly meetings of the city council shall he held on the first Tuesday of each month, commencing at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting may be rescheduled by the council and reconvened as may be useful and appropriate under the circumstances presented. 
(b)  Work session meetings of the city council shall be held on fee last Tuesday of each month, commencing at 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 111, § 1, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 419 , § 1, 4-3-18) 
Charter reference— Authority to provide by ordinance, § 2.02; mayor to preside, § 2.03; election of vice-mayor, § 2.04. 
Sec. 2-21. - Calling special meetings. 
Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor or any two (2) council members by serving notice on each member of the council as provided in section 2.02 of the Charter. 
Sec. 2-22. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall be determined as provided by section 2.02 of the Charter. 
Charter reference— Authority to compel attendance of absent members, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-23. - Meetings open. 
All meetings of the council, regular and special, shall be open to the public. 
Charter reference— Similar requirement, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-24. - Attendance by officers. 
The city attorney and chief of police, and other officers or employees of the city when requested, shall attend meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the council may direct. 
Charter reference— Clerk required to attend all meetings, § 2.06. 
Sec. 2-25. - Rules or order of procedure govern meetings. 
The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern deliberations and meetings of the council. 
Charter reference— Authority to adopt by ordinance, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-26. - Order of business. 
The order of business shall be as specified in the agenda prepared prior to each meeting. 
Sec. 2-27. - Committee reports. 
The chairman of each respective committee, or the council member acting in such chairman's place, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the mayor or any member of the council. 
Sec. 2-28. - Speaking on same subject limited. 
No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject without permission of the mayor. 
Sec. 2-29. - Permission for nonmember to address council. 
No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the same while in session without permission of the mayor. 
Charter reference— Authority to punish for refusal to obey orders, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-30. - Reducing of motions, resolutions and ordinances to writing. 
Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the mayor or the vote of the council. All resolutions and ordinances shall be in writing. 
Charter reference— Ordinances and resolutions to be in written form, § 2.07; recording of vote on each question required, § 2.06. 
Sec. 2-31. - Deciding questions of order. 
All questions of order shall be decided by the mayor of the council with the right of appeal to the council by any member. 
Sec. 2-32. - Order of motions and questions. 
Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order; and on all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall be first put. 
Sec. 2-33. - Motion for adjourn. 
A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. 
Sec. 2-34. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
In instances where the above rules are silent, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, may be used to determine the procedure. 
Secs. 2-35—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 380, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2014 , repealed former Art. III, §§ 2-40—2-58, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 266, § 1, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 339-A. §§ 1, 2, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 376, § 1, 12-3-13 . 

DIVISION 1. - ETHICS RULES 

Sec. 2-40. - Preamble. 
All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. (Ga. Const. art. I, § II, ¶ I). The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office in order to improve his or her own private standing. The principle policies which form the foundation of this code of ethics are: 
(1)  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(2)  The constitutions, laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Georgia and the ordinances of the City of Clarkston should be upheld as a de minimus standard of conduct. 
(3)  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act with the highest moral principles and to consistently react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
(4)  Elected officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
(5)  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-41. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this code of ethics that neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall knowingly engage in any activity which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her judgement or actions in the performance of his or her official duties. Furthermore, the mayor and members of the city council should avoid any action which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain. 
(2)  Impeding city efficiency or economy. 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the city. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-42. - Definitions. 
Benefit shall mean: 
(1)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered, to be sufficient in value to influence the mayor or a member of the city council in the performance or non-performance of an official action; or 
(2)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence the mayor or a member of the city council in the performance or non-performance of an official action. 
Employee shall mean any person who is employed by the City of Clarkston; any person employed part-time by any operating department of the city; and any person who is employed through a contractual agreement with the city. 
Government or city shall mean the City of Clarkston. 
Immediate family shall mean spouse, child, parent or sibling of an elected city official. 
Interest shall mean any direct or indirect financial gain accruing to the mayor or a member of the city council as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, the city. Interest shall not mean any direct or indirect financial gain which is remote or insignificant. 
Mayor and council shall mean any person who is an elected city official, including any person who has been elected but whose term of office has not started. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-43. - Acceptance of gifts. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit from any person, corporation or group which has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-44. - Financial interests and conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall: 
(1)  Have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts with his or her responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good. 
(2)  Either directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his or her office or received due to his or her position. 
(3)  Use his or her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. 
(4)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him or her by virtue of being an elected city official. 
(5)  Accept a benefit from any person, company or group which has any official business pending for decision by the city, including but not limited to applications for zoning or variance approval or contracts with the city. 
(6)  Accept a benefit from any person, company or group which the mayor or member knows or has reason to believe will have official business pending for decision by the city, including but not limited to applications for zoning or variance approval or contracts with the city within a year of the offer or acceptance of the benefit. 
(b)  The mayor or a member of the city council shall be deemed to have a financial interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the mayor or member's immediate family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the mayor or a member may receive any payment or other benefits. 
(3)  Any business or other entity, for profit and not for profit, in which the mayor or a member of the city council is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-45. - Use of public property. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-46. - Use of confidential information. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall directly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, city information not made available to the general public. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-47. - Coercion. 
(a)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any benefits to him or her or to his or her immediate family, or for those with whom the mayor or a member of the city council has business or financial ties. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a city employee, an appointed official of the city or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to his or her immediate family. 
(c)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall use his or her position in any to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a municipal court judge, prosecutor, or public defender in the outcome of matters before the city court. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-48. - Purchases. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall personally order any goods or services for the city. All purchases shall be made by the City Manager, with approval by the City Council as a body where appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-49. - City employees. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall use a city employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. The mayor and any member of the city council shall pay just compensation to any city employee who provides services to the mayor or any member of the city council outside of city working hours and shall not receive or expect a discount or special rate. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-50. - Travel expenses. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall draw per diem or expense money from the city to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend that seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-51. - Commitments. 
Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of the council by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-52. - Candidates. 
No person who has qualified seeking to become an elected official shall make a false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud or conceal wrong doing or withhold information regarding wrong doing in relation to any city or public business. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-53. - Prohibited contracts. 
(a)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with the mayor or any member of the city council or with a business in which the mayor or any member of the city council has an interest. This section shall not apply to the following contracts: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  A contract entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A § 16-10-6. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also apply to any person or business represented by such person, who has been, within the preceding twelve-month period, an elected official of the city, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-54. - Disclosure and actions following disclosure. 
(a)  The mayor and any member of the city council shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this code of ethics, the mayor or council member shall not participate in ex-parte communications with other members regarding the matter at hand. 
(b)  To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after the mayor or any member of the city council is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the mayor or that member of the city council shall leave his or her regular seat as a member of city government and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(c)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision making process on any agenda item or any official act or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Secs. 2-55—2-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-60. - Hearing officer. 
Initial review of ethics complaints, investigations and hearings pursuant to this article shall be conducted by a neutral hearing officer. Such hearing officer shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia for at least the most recent five (5) years. The ethics hearing officer shall be nominated by the city manager and approved by the city council. Such hearing officer shall be engaged by the city pursuant to an annual contract for services and shall be compensated for said services at a reasonable hourly rate to be determined by such contract. The ethics hearing officer shall not reside in nor have a business license with the city, nor shall the hearing officer have any personal or business relationship with any city elected official or the city manager. If such a prohibited relationship arises during the term of the hearing officer he shall immediately inform the city manager and resign his position. The hearing officer shall be prohibited from engaging in city election political activities and from making campaign contributions to candidates in city elections during his term as ethics hearing officer and for six (6) months prior to his appointment and shall not have any other contract or business with the city. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-61. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All ethics complaints against an elected official shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall open a file for the complaint where all pleadings, findings and other materials related to the complaint shall be maintained. All complaints shall be under oath, shall identify the specific section of the code of ethics alleged to have been violated and shall state the facts which constitute a violation of the code of ethics. Every ethics complainant shall complete a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed or approved by the city council. Complaints may be filed only by residents of the city and persons holding a business license with the city (or representing a licensed business). Any complaint filed by any other person shall be dismissed. The person filing the complaint shall swear under oath at the time of the filing that he or she is a resident of the city, state his or her residence address (post office box is not sufficient) and contact information. The complaint shall be based on personal knowledge. All document(s) referred to in the memorandum of complaint shall be attached to the complaint. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complete complaint in proper form, the city clerk shall forward copies of the complaint to the ethics hearing officer and the official that is the subject of the complaint. The hearing officer shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning the complaint and to add the findings and results to the file containing such complaint. The hearing officer shall make a preliminary review of the complaint and determine whether it is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. If so, the hearing officer shall dismiss the complaint by written order. If after such review the complaint is not dismissed, the hearing officer shall schedule a full hearing on the merits of the complaint at which hearing the complainant and respondent may present evidence. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-62. - Hearings. 
(a)  In all hearings under this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complaining party. The Georgia Administrative Procedures Act shall control as to rules of evidence and procedure. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be open to the public and members of the public shall be permitted to record such proceedings by photo, audio and/or video means. 
(b)  After full hearing before the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall be empowered to enter an order dismissing the complaint if it is not supported by the evidence. Upon the conclusion of the hearing by the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall have the following options: 
(1)  Dismiss the complaint; or 
(2)  Refer the complaint to the city council if the evidence presented by the complainant establishes by a preponderance of the evidence the likelihood of a violation. 
(c)  Failure of the hearing officer to take either action above within sixty (60) days of receipt of the complaint shall constitute dismissal of the complaint and no other evidence of dismissal shall be needed. In the event of dismissal of the complaint by the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall set forth the reason for dismissal in a written order to be recorded in the file related to the complaint and maintained by the city clerk. If the hearing officer refers the complaint to the city council for consideration, the hearing officer shall provide the city council with written findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommendation for punishment. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-63. - City council action. 
If the hearing officer determines that a preponderance of the evidence supports a finding of a violation of the code of ethics, the city council shall take action on the complaint at the next regular meeting of the council after the hearing officer refers the matter to the council for action. If a majority of a quorum of the city council finds by clear and convincing evidence that a violation of the code of ethics has in fact occurred, it is authorized to punish the offender according to the punishments set forth in section 2-71. After the city council finds an offender guilty of the violation charged, a majority of a quorum of the city council must agree to the punishment. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-64. - Participation by accused members prohibited. 
If the mayor or any city council member is charged with a violation of the code of ethics, he or she shall not actively participate in or preside over the discussion to determine guilt or punishment in their official capacity as an elected official. Such accused elected official shall not discuss the matter (other than in their capacity as respondent in a public meeting) with other members of the city council and shall not be allowed to vote or veto to determine his or her innocence or guilt nor his or her punishment. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-65. - Participation by complaining official prohibited. 
An elected official who files a complaint, initiates a complaint or investigation or otherwise actively participates in or encourages the filing of a complaint against a member shall not actively participate, preside, vote, or veto in any matter related to such complaint, other than as a witness or as the complainant to present the complaint at a hearing. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-66. - Statute of limitations. 
(a)  No proceedings under this chapter shall be instituted or prosecuted unless the complaint is filed within six (6) months after the commission of the act or omission complained of. The period within which a proceeding under this chapter shall be initiated does not include any period in which the alleged violation is unknown to someone directly injured by the offense and who makes the complaint or is generally unknown to the public. In all cases, the period shall not be tolled in the event the complainant knew or should have known about the alleged violation. 
(b)  An accused official that desires to raise a statute of limitations defense pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall do so by written pleading. If such a defense is raised, the hearing officer shall decide whether such defense prevents the complaint and shall issue his decision in writing. 
(c)  No proceedings under this chapter shall be instituted or prosecuted after the earlier of: 
(1)  The expiration of the term of office, if not re-elected, of the person complained against; or 
(2)  The resignation, death, vacancy, disqualification or withdrawal from office of the person against whom a complaint is filed. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-67. - Rights of accused. 
An elected official accused of violations of the code of ethics shall be entitled to due process, which shall include: 
(1)  To representation by counsel of his choice at his expense at all stages of these proceedings; 
(2)  To written notice of any complaints or charges filed against him; 
(3)  To copies of all pleadings filed in a case against him; 
(4)  To at least ten (10) days notice prior to any hearing held by the hearing officer under this article; and 
(5)  To cross-examine witnesses and to call witnesses and otherwise present evidence in his defense at a hearing, unless the complaint is dismissed upon initial review by the hearing officer. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-68. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics for elected officials shall be reviewable by writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the city council. Provided, however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-69. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  Elected officials may request advisory opinions as to whether actual or contemplated conduct by such elected official is or would be compliant with the code of ethics. Such written request shall fully set forth the circumstances to be evaluated. Requests for advisory opinions shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk, who will forward the request to the city manager. The city manager will then determine whether the request will be presented to the hearing officer. 
(b)  If the city manager directs the hearing officer to proceed, it shall be the responsibility of the hearing officer to interpret this code of ethics and render an advisory opinion as to whether the actual or contemplated conduct by the elected official requesting the opinion is or would be compliant. The opinion of the hearing officer rendered pursuant to this section shall be made available to the public to examine and for the press to publish. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall dismiss any complaint filed against an elected official based upon facts or grounds for which any elected official has previously submitted and received an advisory opinion from the hearing officer that renders an opinion that there is no violation of the code of ethics based upon a real or hypothetical set of circumstances submitted by the elected official. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-70. - Bar against subsequent complaints. 
Where a complainant files a complaint for which the hearing officer fails to make a "referral to city council" or for which the city council fails to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent elected official(s) for a period of six months after termination of the original complaint proceeding. 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 2-71. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to: 
(1)  Disciplinary action which may include a private reprimand, public reprimand, or impeachment; and may also include: 
(2)  A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
( Ord. No. 380, § 1(attch.), 10-7-14 ) 
Chapter 2.5 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No 222, § 1, adopted July 7, 1998, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 21. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of subject matter, the editor has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 222 as Ch. 2.5. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; occupational licenses, § Ch. 11; disorderly conduct, § 12-6 et seq.; loitering for purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire, § 12-8.3; business-related offenses, § 12-31 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on adult establishments, § 36-60-3. 

Sec. 2.5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to further regulate certain types of business, including but not limited to adult entertainment establishments. The city council considered specific evidence of the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses by reviewing extensive reports prepared by the cities of Austin, Texas, New York, NY, Houston, Texas, and St. Paul, Minnesota concerning adult oriented businesses in those cities. Regardless of the findings of detrimental effects on surrounding commercial and residential property values and a marked increase in crime, especially sexually related crime, in areas where these type businesses are found, the City of Clarkston recognizes that regulation cannot amount to prohibition as a protected form of expression would vanish. Recognizing their duty to the citizens of Clarkston to provide regulations which protect their property values, neighborhoods, safety, and well being, as well as their duty to protect the rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons, the city council has sought to balance those competing interests through passage of the following ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments. Adult entertainment establishments include adult bookstores, adult businesses, adult dancing establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult hotels or motels, adult motion picture arcades, adult video stores, erotic dance establishments, encounter centers and rap establishments, escort bureaus and introduction services, and explicit media outlets as said terms are hereinafter defined. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which is offered for sale any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) or more percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale, rental or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent in gross sales or rental income from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion; or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hare [share] reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons who introduces, furnishes or arranges for person who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusements, or who may consort with others about any places of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five (5) years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, pinquerism, sapphism, zooerasty, or masturbation which, to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Explicit media outlet means any commercial establishment which has an inventory of goods that is composed of at least fifty (50) percent of books, pamphlets, magazines, or other printed publications, films, or other media which depict sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct. 
Sexually explicit nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less that a full opaque covering or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state which to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value and predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-3. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall operate, advertise, or cause to be advertised, within the city an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year an adult entertainment establishment applicant shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the applicant's gross receipts and amounts, if any, paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with as a dancer or other employee a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be closed between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and 1:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(g)  No dancer or employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or employee. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined in this chapter shall give, sell or offer to sell any of its stock in trade or other merchandise or any services to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(i)  There shall be no sale or consumption of alcohol or any controlled substance on the premises. 
(j)  Any performance by a dancer or other entertainer in an adult dancing establishment or an erotic dance establishment shall take place upon a platform or stage containing no less than one hundred (100) square feet which is raised from the surrounding floor no less than twelve (12) inches and no more than forty-eight (48) inches as measured from the surrounding floor to the top of the raised surface of the stage or platform. Such establishments may have more than one such stage or platform, but each said stage or platform shall meet the minimum standards as set forth herein. 
(k)  For the protection of the dancers or other entertainers in an adult dancing establishment or an erotic dance establishment, patrons and customers of such establishments shall be separated from the stage or platform where the dancers or entertainers perform by a distance of not less than five (5) feet. To insure such separation, some form of barrier in the form of a rope or other small interior fence shall be provided by the licensee which shall be placed no less than five (5) feet from the stage or platform where the entertainment takes place. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 267, § 1, 1-7-03) 
Sec. 2.5-4. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd or obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-5. - Occupation tax certificate required. 
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any business or activity which would fall within the definition of an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without an occupation tax certificate so to do. No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-6. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult video store, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, encounter center or rap establishment, escort bureau, adult dancing establishment, or explicit media outlet, as defined herein, unless such business shall have a currently valid occupation tax certificate or shall have made proper application for renewal with the time required thereof under this chapter, which occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-7. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for an person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity regulated under this chapter to admit or permit the admission of any minor within a regulated premises. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-8. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by any adult entertainment establishment regulated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-9. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment regulated hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family uses or purposes which would include zoning classification R1, RM, and ROI as defined in Article XIII of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of Clarkston, Georgia. 
(2)  Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, library, school, daycare center, kindergarten or public park is located. 
(3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following categories: 
a.  MI Light Industry district as defined in Sec. 1307 of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of Clarkston, Georgia. 
b.  C1, C2, and C3 Business districts as defined in Sections 1303, 1304 and 1305 of Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of Clarkston, Georgia. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured along a straight line from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit so long as the same is a parcel which is of sufficient size and shape to be used as a lot in the city. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-10. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment facility shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The terms employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee and work on any licensed premises shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The city shall have fifteen (15) days to investigate the information required of the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the city clerk shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on a regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, appeal such decision to the chief of police. The chief of police shall hold a hearing on such appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of appeal. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed by the affected employee to the city council who shall hear such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting unless such meeting shall be within ten (10) days of the appeal whereupon such appeal will be held at the next succeeding regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed, within thirty (30) days, to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
(c)  Suspension; revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this chapter shall result in automatic revocation of the employee's permit to work in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  Independent contractors. Persons who are independent contractors who perform services within an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered employees for the purpose of registration pursuant to the terms of this ordinance and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-11. - Application for occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation desiring to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate. Prior to submitting such application, a processing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be paid to the city to partially defray the cost of processing the application and for the investigation and report generated incident thereto. 
(b)  The application for permit will be made on forms provided by the city and shall provide the information required by section 2.5-12 of this chapter. The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-12. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full true name. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application to include business or employment records of the applicant, all partners if a partnership or association, and all officers and directors if a corporation. 
(5)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, or state had any license or occupation tax certificate for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation engaged in following suspension or revocation of the license. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, the names and address of each of its current officers and directors. An association shall provide the names and addresses of all its members. A partnership shall provide the names and addresses of all its partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk along with the names and addresses of its general and limited partners. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection dealing with corporations shall also be applied. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing official. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, have been convicted of any crime in the last five (5) years such that they would not be considered of good moral character as defined in this chapter, a complete description of such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed shall be provided as well as a statement of the current disposition of the case. 
(8)  If the applicant is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name registration shall be provided. All foreign corporations shall provide a certificate from the Secretary of State that they are qualified to do business in the State of Georgia. All corporations shall provide the current name and address of their designated agent for service of process and a copy of their most recent operating statement. 
(9)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related by blood or marriage to the applicant, any partner or shareholder, officer or director and who are not or will not benefit financially from the operation of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license. 
(10)  Address of the premises to be regulated. 
(11)  Whether the premises are leased or owned. 
(12)  A plat by a registered land surveyor in the State of Georgia, showing the location of the premises to be regulated and showing that it is in compliance with the zoning and distance requirements set forth in section 2.5-9 of this chapter. 
(13)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(14)  Any applicant seeking a license for an adult dancing establishment or an erotic dance establishment shall provide architectural drawings certified as correct by an architect licensed in and by the State of Georgia which clearly shows the size, location and elevation of all platforms and stages required under section 2.5-3(j) of this Code and which shows the location and form of barrier described under section 2.3-3(k) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 267, § 1, 1-7-03) 
Sec. 2.5-13. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-14. - Application—Investigation. 
The city shall have up to forty-five (45) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit as its next regular meeting if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  Application conforms in all respect to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of any attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, which if attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(6)  Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. 
(8)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five (5) years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)  That on that date the business for which an occupation tax certificate is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is in compliance with the location requirements specified in section 2.5-9 of this chapter. 
(12)  That the grant of such occupation tax certificate will not cause a violation of this chapter of any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Clarkston, State of Georgia, or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-15. - Persons prohibited as applicants. 
No occupation tax certificate provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  If a corporation, if any of its officers or directors are not of good moral character. 
(4)  If a partnership or association, if any of its partners or members are not of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-16. - Occupation tax certificate—Refusal, appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it specify the reasons for denial of the occupation tax certificate and prepare a report of its findings. The city clerk shall within ten (10) days, notify applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an occupation tax certificate may appeal such denial to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 2.5-20 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-17. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Occupation tax certificates for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in the chapter. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be due by March 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-18. - Occupation tax certificate nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the certificate, and in such case, the occupation tax certificate upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of the permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an occupation tax certificate is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-19. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its occupation tax certificate without having obtained the permission of the mayor and city council. In order to change location, the adult entertainment establishment must certify to the city clerk that: 
(1)  There has been no change in ownership or management; 
(2)  Provide a plat by a registered land surveyor which shows that the new location is in compliance with the location requirements of section 2.5-9 of this chapter. 
(3)  Shown that the old location has been closed and all merchandise removed. 
(b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his occupation tax certificate. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-20. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The applicant shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice of the council), and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(d)  Final decisions of the city council may be appealed to the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of said final decisions. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-21. - Appeal-alternative procedures. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date no more than ten (10) days following the council meeting and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing to be no later than ten (10) days following the council meeting. The hearing officer shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice in the State of Georgia for no less than three (3) years, may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-22. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant duly sworn testimony and evidence from the applicant, any witness he may wish to call, from interested parties and from the city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of based upon the evidence submitted to it. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-23. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, shall conduct an evidentiary hearing and may receive evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. The city and the appellant shall be allowed to present any evidence they may deem necessary to present their side of the case. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-24. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-25. - Hearing officer-report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings of fact and conclusions of law. He shall state his recommendation to grant or deny the appeal, or he may recommend modification of the decision of the city. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-26. - Hearing officer report; action by council. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-27. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-28. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-29. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an occupation tax certificate, the chief of police shall give written notification to the holder of the certificate of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be hand delivered to the holder of the certificate at least five (5) days prior to any hearing on the revocation. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A certificate holder gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  A certificate holder has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A certificate holder has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A certificate holder has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; 
(5)  A certificate holder, a general or limited partner of a partnership holding a certificate, or an officer or director of a corporate certificate holder has been convicted of any drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime by the state or the city; or 
(6)  A certificate holder fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one (1) day nor more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided however, that the certificate holder shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted, and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police the certificate holder may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Appeals shall be conducted as provided in section 2.5-20 of this chapter. In the event the certificate holder does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-30. - Occupation tax certificate and annual renewal fees. 
The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax and any renewal fee for such occupation tax certificate shall be based on the gross receipts schedule pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of such occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 2.5-31. - Grandfathering of qualified adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Qualified adult entertainment establishment, for purposes of this section, means any "dancing establishment" or "erotic dance establishment" as defined by City Code section 2.5-2 that operated legally on November 1, 2014, under a valid business license and alcohol license issued by DeKalb County. 
(b)  A qualified adult entertainment establishment shall not be subject to the following provisions of the City Code: 
(1)  Subsections (f), (g), (i), (j) and (k) of section 2.5-3; 
(2)  Section 2.5-4; 
(3)  Section 2.5-9; 
(4)  The provision of subsection 3-20(a) regarding "obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper behavior"; and 
(5)  Subsection 3-25(a). 
(c)  Status as a qualified adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon the payment an annual grandfathered adult entertainment establishment fee to the city in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) payable in quarterly installments of twenty five thousand dollars each ($25,000.00) due as follows: January 31, April 30, July 31, October 31. 
(d)  Qualified adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to all local regulation not specifically exempted by this section. 
(e)  Qualified adult entertainment establishments may not expand their operations or the non conformity with city ordinances thereof beyond the scope of each such establishment's legal operations existing on November 1, 2014. 
( Ord. No. 382, § 1, 12-2-14 ) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 264, adopted Nov. 5, 2002, amended former Ch. 3, Arts. I—III, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968 and the following ordinances: 

 

 
Cross reference— Drinking in public, § 12-1; drinking in automobile, § 12-2; drinking in parks, § 13-2; transporting in taxicab, § 20-13; as to dives, see § 12-4. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Applicability of this article. 
The provisions of this article [sections 3-1 through 3-28] shall apply to all types of alcoholic beverage licenses issued with the city. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means a business or establishment where persons, employees, or patrons appear nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. This definition shall include, but not be limited to: adult bookstores; adult businesses; adult motion picture theaters; adult mini-motion picture theaters; adult motion picture arcades; adult video stores; erotic entertainment/dance establishments; escort bureaus; and introduction services. Where applicable, the definitions found in section 2.5-2 of this Code shall apply. However, the definition of adult entertainment establishments shall not include a performance establishment, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description, or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, music hall, theater, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patron's own alcoholic beverages. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership limited liability company or corporation, all partners, officers, managers and directors of the partnership, limited liability company or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement, currently used by the United States. 
Manager means the person who supervises the regular operations of businesses licensed under this chapter. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The word "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits. 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Minor means any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
Owner means any person or partner or stockholder or member owning any percentage of a business. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license including any public sidewalk or roadway adjacent to the premises which is used by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means all social, business, fraternal, veteran, and recreational clubs, lodges, associations, and organizations not generally open to the public but restricted to the registered members of the club, lodge, association or organization, and the guests of members thereof, and which has adopted a constitution and bylaws for its operation and which elects annually or at regular intervals officers and directors responsible for the operation of the affairs of the organization. It shall not include a private club organized and functioning for the sale or serving of beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits. 
Public place means any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Purchaser means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or association purchasing alcoholic beverages from a licensee. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen. A restaurant must fill seventy-five (75) percent of the building's usable square footage, including patios which are immediately adjacent to and a part of the main licensed facility, with tables and chairs intended for dining. A restaurant must be staffed at all times that it is open to the public with a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve edible food to its guests. A restaurant must derive at least fifty-one (51) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals and food. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only, to consumers and not for resale. 
School means any school building, school grounds, college campus, educational facility or educational building owned or run by or affiliated with a state, county, city or private or religious entity, any church school, day care, or kindergarten and to any building at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. It shall not apply to home schools. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 12-368, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, after trial and conviction in the mayor's or municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Violation may also cause suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-4. - License application; fees. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application to the city clerk on the forms prescribed by the city clerk. Each application shall state: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, birth date, present address and addresses for the past five (5) years, business address and business addresses of employers and their addresses for the last five (5) years, name of spouse, complete record of all arrests, convictions and guilty pleas for violations of all laws, city, counties, state and federal, and other cities, counties, and states of both applicant and spouse, and the disposition of all charges within the last five (5) years prior to the application. 
(2)  As to the applicant's location manager (if not the same as the applicant), the same information as required of the applicant in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Exact location (street address and otherwise) of proposed business, including zoning district. The location must be properly identified. 
(4)  Name and address of the owner or landlord and/or resident manager of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
(5)  Trade name (or proposed trade name) of proposed business. 
(6)  Names and addresses of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building, property, or stock, receipt of income from the business or otherwise. 
(7)  Such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being submitted to the city council, or if the application is denied and the license refused, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the two hundred dollars ($200.00) paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(c)  Oath. The application shall be sworn to. 
(d)  Surveyor's certificate. All new applications shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor containing the following information: 
(1)  A scale drawing of the building or proposed building, as situated on the proposed lot. 
(2)  The proposed off street parking facilities available to the building and all outdoor lighting on the premises. 
(3)  The exact location of the business, including street address and DeKalb County tax map parcel number. 
(4)  Current zoning classification of the location. 
(5)  The distance in yards as measured in a straight line from nearest property line to nearest property line from each of the following: the nearest school building, school ground or college campus, and the nearest alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(6)  If a business has been licensed since July 1, 1981, or before, the survey shall be required however no license will be denied based upon a failure to meet the distance requirements as set forth under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(e)  False information. An application under this chapter containing known false information may result in the disapproval, revocation, suspension or failure to renew the license applied for and prosecution as a felony. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-5. - Moral character of license applicants. 
(a)  No person shall be granted an alcoholic beverages license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city council that such person, partners in the firm, officers, and directors of the corporation, or members and managers of the limited liability company shall be of good moral character. In no event shall any license be granted to any person or to officers, or directors or members or managers of any such entities who have been convicted under any federal, state, or local law or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime, misdemeanor, or felony involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application, nor shall any such person sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  At the time an application is submitted for an alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither he, nor any of the other owners of the retail or wholesale establishment, nor the manager of such establishment has been convicted or has plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime, misdemeanor, and/or felony involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any applicant, partner, officer, manager, member or employee used in the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages after a license has been granted be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws regulating the sale of narcotics, liquor, wine or beer, or the lottery laws of this state, the license may be revoked by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-6. - General licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and who shall not have been a resident of, or qualified to do business in, the State of Georgia for three (3) years prior to the year for which the application is made. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is the operation of a hotel or motel, the officer or agent of such corporation who acts as an applicant on behalf of the corporation shall have been a resident of the state for the one-year period next preceding the year in which application is made. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage without a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  The city license shall not be valid without current state license(s). 
(d)  A retail establishment shall not have alcoholic beverages on the sales floor or in cooler unless the establishment has a current city alcoholic beverage license. 
(e)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(f)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." 
(g)  Where the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, members, managers and majority shareholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its majority shareholder, if an individual. In the case of limited liability company, the license shall be issued jointly to the company and to the holder of the largest economic interest in the company, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder or holder of the largest economic interest is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation or company and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person that has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(h)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within the two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. 
(i)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity that has violated this Code section within one year prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(j)  The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(k)  The city council may decline to issue a license when after reasonable effort the city clerk or chief of police is unable to verify any statement or information required to be disclosed or to adequately conduct a full investigation of any applicant due to foreign background, ties or interest or for any reason or may revoke a license previously granted. 
(l)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in DeKalb County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of DeKalb County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the city and shall be in such form as prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 407, § 1, 3-7-17 ) 
Sec. 3-7. - Each location to have a separate license; transferability of alcoholic beverage licenses; fee required to change establishment owner, manager, partnership, stockholders or establishment name. 
(a)  A separate application for an alcoholic beverage license must be made for each location and a separate license must be issued. Each application shall be accompanied by a survey from a registered land surveyor showing that the establishment is not within the prohibited distance from any residence, school, library, church, public park, or adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be personal to the licensee. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(c)  In the case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for a new license with the city. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  If a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of forty-five (45) days from the date determined to be the date of severance. No such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, and the application indicates that no change of ownership has occurred, except as provided in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorizations to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license fee was issued, but a transfer and administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be due and payable at the time of application for the new license. 
(e)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate ownership or ownership interests between existing members of a limited liability company at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock or ownership interest to a third party which do not result in any person increasing his ownership to a total of ten (10) percent or more. 
(f)  A new application for a license shall be made whenever there is a new owner, change in partnership, or change in stockholders or members holding an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(g)  Any licensee who desires to transfer the location of any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city clerk prior to any transfer of location. The request for transfer shall be accompanied by a survey as required by subsection (a) of this section. The city clerk shall determine whether the new location is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. No change in location of a licensed establishment shall be permitted unless the new location complies with all provisions of this chapter. The city council shall have the authority to approve or deny the transfer of location in the same manner that it may approve or deny the issuance of a new license. An investigative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid by the licensee at the time that an application is made for the transfer of an establishment location. Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(h)  Any licensee who desires to change the name of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city clerk prior to any change of name, and the city clerk shall direct the issuance of a corrected license in replacement of the original license. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the licensee at the time that an application is made for the change of an establishment name. 
(i)  Any licensee who changes the manager of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city clerk within three (3) days of the effective date of such change and shall file with the city clerk such information about the new manager as the city clerk may require. A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid at the time that an application is made for change of an establishment manager to defer the costs of investigation and administration. 
(j)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause to cancel and revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-8. - Nonprofit civic organizations eligible for issuance of temporary license. 
Upon application by a nonprofit or charitable organization and approval by the city council, a temporary license for the retail sale of beer and wine may be issued to such nonprofit or charitable organization. Such temporary license shall be subject to such conditions as may be established by the city council, and no temporary license shall be granted for a period longer than three (3) days. The fee for a temporary license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-9. - Issuance of alcoholic beverages licenses subject to state and local code requirements. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any city elected official or an employee of any city department, or his spouse or minor children; nor shall any such person have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall be issued for a location that fails to meet all applicable state and local fire, life safety, building, health, and zoning codes. No license shall be issued to location in any zoning district except C-1, C-2, and C-3. 
(C)  No new or renewal alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes, business license fees, or any other taxes or fees which are owed to the city by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-10. - License may issue; sales prohibited in incomplete establishment. 
Where a building intended for the sale of alcoholic beverages is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clear compliance with all provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of this Code. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment, however, until it has been completed in accordance with such plans, a certificate of occupancy issued, and is inspected by the city code enforcement officer to insure compliance with city codes. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-11. - Establishment to open for business within three months of issuance of license; cessation of operation; automatic forfeiture of license for failure to open and remain open. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must open for business within three (3) months after issuance of the license at the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such time shall automatically forfeit and cancel the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the licensee. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall cease to operate the business as authorized in the license for a period of three (3) consecutive months shall, upon completion of the three-month period, automatically forfeit his license. Such license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-12. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew the license shall file application, with the requisite fee as hereinafter provided, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. All applications for renewal will be reviewed by the city clerk. Licensees do not have a right to automatic renewal and must be in compliance with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year; otherwise, a penalty equal to twenty (20) percent of the annual license will be imposed. No renewal license shall be granted after December 31, but such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)  Except for temporary licenses granted under section 3-8, all licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
(c)  Failure to fully complete the renewal application, as required by the city clerk, will delay the renewal. The failure to furnish complete information within thirty (30) days after being requested shall result in automatic denial of the renewal. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-13. - Denial, suspension and revocation of alcoholic beverages licenses. 
(a)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license of any licensee to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to sell alcoholic beverages shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation, shall take the necessary steps to insure that alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(b)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city council when the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omits information required in the application for a license or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee where the establishment has been found in violation of the specified days or hours of operation or sales as stipulated in this chapter. 
(d)  The city council may revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive twelve-month period. 
(e)  The city council may revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)  The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known. 
(g)  An act of omission of a licensee, owner of more than a ten (10) percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city council determines to its own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, that in the case of an employee, the city council must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, resulted from a lack of supervision by the licensee, or that the licensee had not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(h)  Any license may be revoked or suspended by the city council for good cause after hearing upon five (5) days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing and a general statement of the charges to be considered. Good cause for the suspension or revocation of any such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses; violation of this chapter or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the licensing of such businesses; for the violation of any city ordinance, rule or regulation other than traffic ordinances; or for irregularities, omissions, or untruths in the application for a license. 
(i)  In addition to all other authority to deny, revoke or suspend a license, any application for a license may be denied and any existing license may be revoked or suspended by the city council in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. In making such a determination, the city council shall assess the extent to which the granting of the license or the continued holding of the license would contribute to the following problems: 
(1)  Littering in the area of the establishment. 
(2)  Loitering in the area of the establishment. 
(3)  The public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the establishment. 
(4)  The exposure of minors to the sale of alcoholic beverages because of the number of minors who frequent the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-14. - Employee regulations. 
(a)  Certain employee regulations shall apply to all establishments holding an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(b)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee. 
(c)  No person shall be employed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by an establishment holding a license under this chapter unless such person first certifies in writing, on a form provided by the police department, that he is eligible to obtain a work permit. Licensees shall make a good faith effort to insure that such employees file applications for work permits as soon as practicable. In no case shall a licensee allow any employee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages when such employee has failed to apply for a work permit within five (5) days of the date of their regular employment. 
(d)  All employees who work for a business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city who are actually engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to apply for and obtain a work permit from the police department for each location at which the employee is working. All work permits issued to employees who sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall have on the work permit the person's name and address, and the name and address of the establishment. No work permit is required of employees who are employed in a grocery store or convenience store where less than ten (10) percent of the store sales arise from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  No work permit shall be issued to any applicant until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, address, Social Security number, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of any arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Because of the inclusion of arrest information and social security number, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. The police chief, or his designee, shall have a search made relative to any police record of the applicant. If there is no record of violation of this chapter, or of any similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, the police chief shall issue a work permit to the employee, stating he or she is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the police chief shall so notify the employer. 
(f)  Work permits shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year for which they are issued. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to file with the police chief the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and phone numbers twice annually on or before June 1 and on or before December 1. 
(h)  All work permits issued through administrative error or through an error in the background investigation may be revoked by the police chief. 
(i)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cooks, dishwashers, grocery bag boys or similar jobs that do not involve selling or serving or controlling the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(j)  Except as provided in this section, no licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a work permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid work permit of each such employee. 
(k)  If any work permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the work permit to the police department. 
(l)  All work permits issued under this chapter remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any city police officer. 
(m)  Any employee engaged in selling or serving or controlling the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 407, § 2, 3-7-17 ) 
Sec. 3-15. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn police officers of the city shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-16. - License and certain Code provisions to be posted. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city shall include a statement as to the type of license issued, the name of the licensee, the name of the licensed establishment, and the address of the licensed establishment. All licenses issued shall, at all times, be kept plainly exposed to view within the premises. 
(b)  All licensees shall post in a prominent location on the licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(c)  Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the chief of police, and shall include either the language of the applicable Code sections, or summaries approved by the chief of police. 
(d)  The city clerk is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the city clerk. 
(e)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law. 
(f)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED, AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-17. - Application of chapter provisions to minors generally. 
(a)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be employed in or about the premises of any establishment licensed to sell distilled spirits at retail in original packages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverages for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to exhibit faked, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, other than a licensed employee working in a licensed establishment, to have an open container of any alcoholic beverage in his possession. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent, or employee to allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, other than a licensed employee of a licensed establishment, to enter a licensed premises; provided, however, that this section does not apply to properly licensed restaurants, food or convenience stores, or private clubs. 
(f)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is not sold, served, or has in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment, except that a licensed employee working in a licensed establishment may have in his possession alcoholic beverages for the purpose of selling or serving such alcoholic beverages. The term "identification" as used in this section, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, a photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-18. - Acts prohibited by retailers generally. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell any alcoholic beverage to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Sell any alcoholic beverage to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell any alcoholic beverage on any day or at any time when such sale is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of an establishment not licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-19. - Purchase from and sales to other than license holders. 
No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-20. - Unlawful conduct on licensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter to permit any disturbance of the peace, any obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper behavior, conduct or practices in the licensed premises, or to operate the business carried on the licensed premises in such a manner as to create a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee, to fail to report to the police department any disturbance which occurs immediately outside their premises or in their parking facilities of which they have knowledge. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to employ any person who has been convicted of, entered a plea to, or has otherwise been found guilty of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or alcoholic beverage violations. 
(d)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, his agent, or employee to report to the police department any usage or possession of illegal drugs or narcotics and to report any unlawful conduct of any nature which occurs on the licensed premises. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee, to fail to assist any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duty while the officer is on a licensed premise. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-21. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days. 
Licensees may sell alcoholic beverages on election days, provided that such sale is not within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. The limitations imposed by this section shall be in effect beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-22. - Open area and patio sales. 
Consumption or sale of beer or wine in open areas or on decks or patios is not permitted unless an establishment holding a license for consumption of beer or wine on the premises complies with the following regulations: 
(1)  The open area, patio or deck must be enclosed in a manner that directs ingress and egress by the public through a single entrance only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(2)  The open area, patio or deck shall be enclosed by a structure at least forty-two (42) inches in height as measured from the floor of the open area, patio or deck. Such structure must meet all building code requirements of the city. 
(3)  Any license holder desiring to obtain approval for open area, patio or deck sales must submit to the city a complete set of plans that will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by appropriate members of the city staff. All plans and final construction pursuant to such plans shall meet the requirements of this chapter, the health code, the fire code and any other codes applicable to such structures. Only upon satisfactory completion of all final inspections will the city approve of any open area, patio or deck sales. 
(4)  Any structure or area set aside for open area, patio or deck sales shall not contain a number of square feet that represents an amount greater than forty (40) percent of the existing seating area of the establishment. 
(5)  Loudspeakers or other amplifiers of sound shall not be permitted on open areas, patios or decks. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-23. - Open containers and brown bag establishments prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages or other intoxicating beverage at any public place within the city, or for any person to have in his possession any unsealed or opened container with such intoxicating beverage in it at any public place within the city, except as provided under the terms and conditions of special permits issued by the city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage upon real property of the city that is used as a public park, playground or school. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages in any automobile on the streets of the city, whether such automobile shall be moving or parked. 
(d)  Brown bag establishments shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-24. - Signs and advertising. 
(a)  No outdoor advertising promoting the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the exterior of any establishment that is licensed for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, any establishment where alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises, or at any other place within the city. 
(b)  No sign, show window, advertising or display promoting the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be visible from the exterior of any wholesale or retail establishment that is licensed under this chapter, any establishment where alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises, or at any other place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-25. - Prohibited types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a)  The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (a) of this section or where such person(s) perform(s) or simulates any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons or employees of the licensed establishment participate in activities or conduct described in subsections (a) and (b) above; provided however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a traditional or mainstream performance establishment which derives less than ten (10) percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the purposes of this section shall be based on the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the licensed year for which an alcohol license is to be issued. In the event the establishment has not been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for a twelve-month period immediately preceding the year for which an alcoholic beverage license is sought, gross annual income shall be based on the average monthly gross income for the preceding months during which the establishment has an alcoholic beverage license. In the event that an applicant is a new establishment, it shall complete a form and an affidavit furnished by the city clerk showing projected anticipated gross income and anticipated gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. A temporary license for no more than two (2) months shall be issued by the city clerk for such establishments if such establishments otherwise qualify for a license under the provisions of this chapter. At the expiration of the temporary license period, said establishment must demonstrate gross income of less than ten (10) percent in the preceding two (2) months from the sale of alcoholic beverages. In the event that such business establishes the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages is as required under this section, and otherwise meets all qualifications for a license, a new temporary license will be issued for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(c)  The city clerk may, at any time, require that a licensed mainstream performance establishment obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals incorrect, incomplete, or misleading information was submitted, then the permit issued pursuant to this section shall be automatically revoked by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-26. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with sale of any other alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The sale of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half (½) the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink or drinks by up to one-half (½) the price customarily charged. 
(4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed by any one (1) person. 
(5)  Increasing the volume of alcohol contained in drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(6)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons, any alcoholic beverage containing more that three (3) ounces of distilled spirits. 
(7)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering any person, any beer or wine in a container of more than twelve (12) ounces or its metric equivalent. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(c)  In this section, "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-27. - Sales by the drink permitted only at bona fide restaurants. 
(a)  No beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in a restaurant as defined in this chapter. A restaurant holding an alcohol beverage license must (i) be open to the public at least six (6) hours per day, serving at least two meals per day, with a minimum serving time of three (3) hours per meal; and (ii) serve meals at least six days a week with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating. 
(b)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the dining seating area required by this chapter shall be at a common table or counter area. 
(c)  The principle business of a restaurant shall be the sale of food. As used in this section, principal business shall mean that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. The calculation of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the regulations contained in this chapter. All restaurants shall submit quarterly reports to the city clerk as required by this chapter. Such reports shall clearly indicate the sales receipts of the restaurant for food and the sales receipts for alcoholic beverages. The report shall be post marked on or before the last day of the calendar month after the calendar quarter. For the purposes of reporting, food shall be defined as all edible substances appropriate for human consumption as determined by the health department inspecting the city's restaurants and lounges as sold or provided to the public in a restaurant as defined in the Code. Food shall not be construed to include olives, cherries, limes, lemons, salt, pepper, pineapples, celery, tomato juice, or any other fruit, vegetable or dairy product such as ice cream, cream, yogurt, milk or soft drinks, water, tonic water, other non-alcoholic carbonated or non-carbonated beverages when such items are used in alcoholic beverages or mixed drink as a essential part of the beverage, mixed drink, or as a garnish thereon. 
(d)  If a restaurant fails to report food sales receipts of at least fifty-one (51) percent as calculated herein and as defined herein after one-quarter (¼) of a calendar year of reporting such failure shall be considered cause for suspension, probation, revocation or other appropriate action under this chapter. 
(e)  The reports described herein shall be in a form recognized by certified public accountants and shall utilize common and generally recognized accounting principles and shall be submitted under oath. Those submitting the reports shall be prosecuted for fraudulent statements under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 by a court of competent jurisdiction, if such reports are not true. 
(f)  Suspension, probations, revocations, or other actions based solely on food sales receipts will not occur until after three months receipts have been submitted. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit actions under this chapter or for other violations of local ordinances or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-28. - Measurement of distances. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements, to determine distances as required by the provisions of this chapter relating to the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is more appropriate under the applicable section. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-29. - Hours of operation for package retailers; hours of sale for consumption on premises. 
(a)  The retail package sale of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted within the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall only be permitted within the city Monday through Thursday from 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. the following day, Friday and Saturday from 9:00 a.m. until 2:50 a.m. the following day, and on Sunday from 1:00 p.m. until 1:55 a.m. on Monday morning. 
(c)  There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half (½) hour. 
(d)  All licensed restaurants must close their premises to the public and clear the premises of patrons within one (1) hour after the time set in this section for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 2, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 11-366, § 1, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-30. - Visibility. 
(a)  Each facility that sells any alcoholic beverage shall have a clearly marked point(s) of entry. 
(b)  The point(s) of entry must be clearly visible from a public street; however, this requirement shall not apply to hotels or where the location of the point of entry is in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(c)  At all points of entry, clear windows & clear doors are required in all facilities licensed hereunder. If a facility contains a cashier's cage or other internally enclosed facility, clear windows and clear doors must also be utilized except as set out below. 
(d)  All businesses licensed hereunder, including those entirely enclosed in another building such as a restaurant located in a hotel, must keep all windows, doors, etc., free of visual obstructions so that persons outside the facility may clearly see inside the facility. No tinting, shades or other devices shall be used to obstruct the view into the facility. Shades, curtains, blinds, etc., may be used to reduce sun glare so long as such measures do not impede visual access to the facility's interior. 
(e)  All businesses licensed hereunder must keep a level of lighting internally adequate to provide visual access and safety to law enforcement or other emergency responders twenty-four (24) hours a day seven (7) days a week. External lighting cannot be solely used to meet the standards required herein. 
(f)  Offices which do not contain cash registers within a facility may be excluded from subsections (c) and (d). 
(Ord. No. 12-368, § 3, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-31. - Completeness of application; denial; appeal; resubmittal. 
(a)  No application shall be considered until the city clerk deems the same complete as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  If the application is denied, the same or substantially same application cannot be resubmitted for six months after the date of denial. 
(c)  Appeal of any decision by the city council regarding an application pursuant to this chapter shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 12-368, § 3, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-32. - Production of records; audits. 
(a)  In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the city clerk shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, electronic or magnetic media and associated software, reports or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or showing payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make the original records or certified copies available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, and wine separately; 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes; 
(4)  Monthly Georgia Sales and Use Tax Reports; and 
(5)  Federal Income Tax Returns with all Form 1099's. 
(Ord. No. 12-368, § 3, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-33. - Sale without license prohibited. 
Beer, malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits shall not be distributed, sold or possessed for the purposes of sale without a license granted by the city council. A separate application must be made and a separate license to sell beer, malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits must be obtained for each location where the same is sold at retail or by the drink. 
( Ord. No. 405, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 3-34—3-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 3-50. - Authority to sell by the drink; license required. 
Beer, malt beverages and/or wine may be sold by the drink at bona fide restaurants in the incorporated limits of the city only under a license granted by the city council, upon terms and conditions provided by this article. No person may hold a license for the sale of beer, malt beverages or wine to be sold by the drink at the same location where alcohol is sold in the original packages. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 405, § 2, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-51. - License fees. 
Before any license for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the package or by the drink shall be granted or renewed, the applicant therefore shall comply with all applicable regulations adopted by the city council and shall pay a license fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 405, § 3, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-52. - Excise taxes on malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling beer and malt beverages within the city, an excise tax as follows: 

 
(b)  In addition to the license fees, there is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of wine in the city in the following amounts: Eight cents ($0.08) per liter. The tax shall be prorated on less than liter quantities. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer who has sold beer or malt beverages or wine within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all beer, malt beverages and wine, by size and type of container, for the month, sold within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this article. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, and a penalty of ten (10) percent of such unpaid tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the tax. 
(d)  The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipment. The city retains the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city to determine compliance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-53. - Authority to sell by the package; license required; new licenses prohibited with certain exceptions. 
(a)  Beer, malt beverages and/or wine may be sold at retail in the package within the incorporated limits of the city only under a license granted by the city council, upon terms and conditions provided by this article. No person may hold a license for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine at retail in the original packages and a license for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises at the same location. 
(b)  Effective July 3, 2016, the City no longer issues new licenses for the package sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine for package stores, convenience stores, other similar businesses, or for any business other than those specifically identified in section 3-58 of this article. Licensees holding a City license for retail package beer, malt beverages and/or wine sales other than those pursuant to section 3-58, or a DeKalb County license in the case of subsequently annexed locations, may renew and/or transfer such licenses only in strict conformance with the terms of section 3-54 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 405, § 4, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-54. - Grandfathered licenses. 
Licensees licensed for retail package beer, malt beverage and/or wine sales other than pursuant to section 3-58 may renew such license annually pursuant to the terms of this chapter so long as they comply with the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  Such licenses may only be renewed for the same location; 
(b)  A grandfathered licensee may not expand the area of its retail space dedicated to package alcohol for sale; 
(c)  A grandfathered licensee may not add a type of alcoholic beverage for sale for which it was not licensed on July 3, 2016; and 
(d)  Prior to January 1, 2023, a grandfathered license may be transferred to a new qualified licensee, at the same location only, pursuant to section 3-7 of this chapter. After such date, grandfathered licenses to sell beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the package may not be transferred to another licensee. 
( Ord. No. 405, § 5, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-55. - Proximity of establishment to school ground, church, library, public park or adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the wholesale sale of beer, malt beverages or wine is located within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of any school ground. 
(b)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages is located within two hundred (200) yards of the property line of a school, school ground or public park, or the entrance to any church or library, or the entrance to an existing establishment licensed for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages. The provisions of this subsection shall not prevent the renewal of a license existing on July 3, 2016, at such location. 
(c)  No license shall be issued where any entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located within one hundred (100) yards of a school, school ground or public park, or the entrance to any church or library. 
(d)  No license shall be issued where any entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located within one hundred sixty-six (166) yards of the entrance to any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine is located within fifty (50) yards of a single-family residence. 
(f)  The city council may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license for the sale of beer, malt beverages or wine where there is evidence that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with minimum distance from schools. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 405, § 6, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-56. - Wholesaler's delivery to retail outlets; marking of vehicles. 
No beer, malt beverages or wine shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-57. - Machines operated for amusement purposes on retail premises. 
No retail dealer in packaged beer, malt beverages or wine shall permit on his premises any slot machines or mechanical music boxes or pinball machines or any form of electronic or mechanical game machine or coin-operated device which might be used for entertainment or amusement purposes. However, this section shall not apply to any "Class A machine" nor any "Class B machine" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
(Ord. No. 12-368, § 3, 9-4-12; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 6-7-16 ) 
Sec. 3-58. - New licenses permitted for certain designated businesses. 
After July 3, 2016, new licenses for the retail sale by the package of beer, malt beverages and/or wine may be obtained only for businesses that qualify as a "growler shop," "specialty wine shop" or a "grocery store" as defined in this section and meet the other criteria for a license set forth in this Chapter. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Growler means a reusable glass jug, sized 32—64 ounces, used to transport beer for off-premises consumption. The container shall be sealed, on-premises, with a tamper-proof plastic cap. 
(b)  Growler shop means a business engaged primarily in the sale of growlers of beer. A growler shop must offer at least twelve (12) varieties of beer from at least six (6) beer manufacturers for sale by the growler. A growler shop may dedicate up to forty-nine (49) percent of its sales floor space to beer sold by the bottle or can. 
(c)  Specialty wine shop means a business engaged primarily in the sale of wine by the bottle. A specialty wine shop shall offer at least fifty (50) varieties of wine from at least twenty-five (25) wine manufacturers. A specialty wine shop may dedicate up to twenty-five (25) percent of its sales floor space to beer for sale by the bottle or can. 
(d)  Grocery store means a retail establishment which is primarily engaged in the sale of uncooked food, has a total retail floor space of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of which at least eighty-five (85) percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
( Ord. No. 405, § 7, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 3-59. - License available for defined qualified convenience stores. 
(a)  The term "Qualified Convenience Store," as used in this section, shall mean a convenience store that meets each of the following criteria: 
(1)  It obtained a land-disturbance permit from the city for development of the store on or before December 6, 2016; and 
(2)  It obtained a business license from the city to operate a convenience store on or before September 21, 2017; and 
(3)  The store has been continuously operating as a convenience store from September 21,2017 through the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of City Code § 3-53(b) a new license for the package sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine shall be issued for a "qualified convenience stores" location if the applicant for a license otherwise satisfies the applicable regulations and criteria of Chapter 3 of the City Code. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to this section shall be considered a "grandfathered license" pursuant to section 3-54 and may be renewed and/or transferred only in strict conformance with the terms of City Code section 3-54. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 4-3-18) 
Secs. 3-60—3-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PACKAGED DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 3-70. - New licenses prohibited; existing licenses grandfathered. 
(a)  Effective July 3, 2016, the city no longer issues new licenses for the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle. Licensees holding a city license, or a DeKalb County license in the case of subsequently annexed locations, for package sales of distilled spirits on July 2, 2016, shall be permitted to continue operating under their existing licenses at their current locations in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Distilled spirits by the bottle may only be sold within the city under a license grandfathered under subsection (a) upon the terms and conditions set forth in this article. Grandfathered licenses as described in subsection (a) may be renewed at the same location only. A grandfathered licensee shall not expand its operation or facility. Prior to January 1, 2023, a grandfathered license may be transferred to a new qualified licensee, at the same location only, pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Chapter. After such date, licenses to sell distilled spirits by the package may not be transferred to another licensee. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 405, § 8, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 3-71. - License fee, excise tax in addition to retail license fee; records. 
(a)  Before any license to sell distilled spirits by the package at retail may issue, the applicant for such license shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of distilled spirits and shall pay a license fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(b)  In addition to the license fees established by this section, there is herby imposed an excise tax upon all distilled spirits purchased by persons holding licenses for retail sales of distilled spirits issued by the city at the rate of fourteen cents ($0.14) per liter. 
(c)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits to person holding retail licenses, and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk no later than the tenth of each month, based upon the units of distilled spirits sold in the previous month. Any such excise tax not paid in full by the tenth of each month shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, and a penalty of ten (10) percent of such unpaid tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the tax. The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing the type, volume and price of distilled spirits sold to each retail licensee. The city clerk may audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city for the purposes of determining compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter including the right to compel each distributor to attach copies of all pertinent invoices to his sworn statement. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-72. - Application for license to be accompanied by statement of information relative to interest in retail liquor stores. 
(a)  In addition to all other information required by other provisions of this chapter, all applications for licenses, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests, as defined by state law, in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the sale of liquor at retail, together with any interest each person or any immediate relative has in any other retail liquor store located at any other place; the ownership of land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor, or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial, or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the city clerk to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state law. 
(b)  Any change in relationship declared in subsection (a) of this section must be filed when made with the city clerk, and failure to do so within a period of five (5) days after such change is made shall be grounds for the city clerk to recommend revocation or suspension of the license by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-73. - Hours of delivery or sale for wholesalers. 
No wholesaler shall sell or deliver any packaged distilled spirits to any retailer licensed by the city except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 346, §§ 1, 3, 8-4-10) 
Sec. 3-74. - Proximity of establishment to residence, library, church, school or school ground, or public park. 
(a)  No license for the wholesale or retail sale of packaged distilled spirits shall be issued where an entrance to the place of business is located as follows: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) yards of the property line of a single family private residence unless that residence is located in a district zoned TC-1 or NC-1. 
(2)  Within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of any public park, or the entrance to any church or library. 
(3)  Within two hundred (200) yards of the property line of any school or school grounds. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured as provided in section 3-28 of this chapter. 
(c)  The city council may, in their discretion, deny any license for the sale of distilled spirits where there is clear and convincing evidence presented that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements from schools. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-75. - Places where retail sales permitted. 
(a)  No distilled spirits shall be sold at retail except in: 
(1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to retail sale of distilled spirits with no less than ten (10) parking spaces devoted specifically to the retail store; or 
(2)  Retail establishments in which space has been set aside and devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits, with ingress and egress provided directly to, and only to, the exterior of the buildings in which the facility is located and not any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided hereafter. 
(3)  Hotels, motels, and high-rise office buildings where: 
a.  Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; and 
b.  No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
(b)  Each retail licensee shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four (4) copies of a printed price list of the distilled spirits offered for sale, provided that a licensee, in lieu of having four (4) copies of a printed price list, may have the prices placed on the bottles or on the front of the shelf where distilled spirits are exhibited for sale. 
(c)  No exterior signs may be used to advertise the price of any distilled spirits offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 3-76. - Machines operated for amusement purposes on retail premises. 
No retail dealer in packaged distilled spirits shall permit on his premises any slot machines or mechanical music boxes or pinball machines or any form of electronic or mechanical game machine or coin-operated device which might be used for entertainment or amusement purposes. However, this section shall not apply to any "Class A machine" nor any "Class B machine" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 395, § 2, 6-7-16 ) 
Sec. 3-77. - Signs and display of license. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 3-75, no signs shall be erected anywhere within the city advertising or promoting the sale of distilled spirits, the sign ordinances of the city notwithstanding. 
(b)  Each licensee for the retail sale of distilled spirits licensed hereunder shall have printed on a front window or entrance of the licensed premises the name of the licensee, together with the inscription "City of Clarkston Retail License No.____________," in uniform letters not less than four (4) inches nor more than eight (8) inches in height. 
(c)  The city license shall at all time be kept plainly exposed to view within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-78. - Persons having direct financial interest in wholesale liquor license holding other licenses; identification of wholesale distributor's vehicles. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of distilled spirits at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this article regardless of whether that wholesale license has been issued by the city. 
(b)  No distilled spirits shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Secs. 3-79—3-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 3-90. - Authority to sell; license required. 
Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises within the incorporated area of the city only under a license granted by the city council upon terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-91. - License fees and excise tax. 
(a)  The fee for a consumption of distilled spirits by the drink on premises where sold, license shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year. In exception to the general provisions of section 3-4, the fee for such license may be paid in two (2) installments, rather than one (1) lump sum payment due at the time of original or renewal application. In the case of a new license application, one-half (½) of the license fee shall be paid at the time of application, and the other half shall be paid at the time of issuance of the license. In the case of renewal license application, one-half (½) shall be paid at the time of application and the other half shall be paid no later than March 1 next following the date of application. 
(b)  In addition to the license fee in subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all distilled spirits purchased by persons holding a consumption on the premises license at the rate of fourteen cents ($0.14) per liter. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 346, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2010, repealed former § 3-92 in its entirety which pertained to hours of operation for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for on premises consumption and derived from Ord. No. 264, adopted Nov. 5, 2002. 
Sec. 3-93. - Private clubs. 
No private club shall operate solely for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages to its members. Private clubs may be granted a license by the city council upon the payment of a business license tax, as established by the city council, and may sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises upon compliance with the provisions of this article regulating such sale and licensing including the payment of appropriate license fees and all excise taxes described herein as may be applicable. Private clubs shall be subject to all the requirements including the food service requirements imposed upon public establishments under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-94. - Separate application and separate license required for each location. 
A separate application must be made for a license and a separate license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises must be obtained for each location where the same is sold. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-95. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell distilled spirits by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-96. - Proximity of establishment to schools, school grounds, churches, libraries, public parks and adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this article where an entrance to a place of business designed for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises is located: 
(1)  Within two hundred (200) feet of a school, school ground or public park, or the entrance to any church or library. 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet of the entrance to any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  The city council may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises where there is evidence that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance from schools. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Secs. 3-97—3-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 3-110. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other excise taxes now imposed by law, a tax on the retail purchases of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink excluding the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or similar fermented beverage, to be collected at the rates and in the manner set forth in this section: 
(1)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverages, at retail in the city, shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three (3) percent of the sales price or charge for such beverages. The tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the licensee making such sales, as hereafter provided, and the licensee shall remit the same to the city, such taxes to be remitted by the licensee to the city clerk on or before the twentieth day of the succeeding month, to be delinquent if remitted thereafter, with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, and the amount of taxes collected by him from his purchasers, on such form as may be required by the city clerk, and when received by the city clerk it shall be a credit against the tax imposed by the article on the licensee. Every licensee, as defined in this section, making a sale or sales of such beverages shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three (3) percent of such gross sale or sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, or the amount of taxes collected by him from his purchaser, as provided in this section, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Gross sales shall include all credit sales to the extent permitted by the laws of the state and shall be reported and the taxes collected thereon remitted to the city clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales, and the fact that the licensee may receive payment from such credit sale or sales in a later reporting period shall not relieve or excuse the licensee's responsibility for collecting and remitting the taxes as provided under this article. 
(3)  The tax so levied is and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in the form of excise, license or privilege taxes, and shall be in addition to all other fees and taxes levied. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-111. - Tax levied on purchaser. 
The taxes imposed in this article are upon the purchaser and shall be collected by the licensee from the purchaser. Therefore, the licensee shall collect the tax imposed under this article from the purchaser and shall pay the tax over to the city. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-112. - Tax added to sales price; licensee liable. 
Licensees shall, as far as practicable, add the amount of the tax imposed under this article to the sales price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser to the licensee, until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. Any licensee who shall neglect, fail, or refuse to collect the tax provided in this article upon any, every and all retail sales made by him, or his agents or employees, of alcoholic beverages, which are subject to the tax imposed in this article, shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-113. - Licensee not to advertise that he will absorb tax. 
A licensee shall not advertise or hold out to the public, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb all or any part of the tax, or that he will relieve the purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-114. - Final returns within fifteen days of selling or quitting business. 
If any licensee liable for any tax levied under this article shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit the business, he shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-115. - Deduction allowed licensee, provided tax not delinquent. 
In reporting and paying the amount of tax due under this article, each license shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act" O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now or hereafter amended, provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-116. - Tax delinquent on twenty-first day; delinquency cause for revocation or denial of renewal. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall, for each month, become delinquent on the twenty-first day of each succeeding month. Any such delinquent tax shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, and a penalty of ten (10) percent of such delinquent tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the tax. The city clerk is empowered, and it shall be her duty when any tax becomes delinquent under this article, to pursue any remedy or right of collection and payment of taxes lawfully levied by the city, as may be allowed under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Any default or delinquency of tax levied under this article shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of license. 
(c)  When the governing authority determines that a licensee has been chronically delinquent or chronically in default under this article, the city council, when acting upon the application of such licensee for renewal of his license, may, in the exercise of it discretion, deny such application upon the grounds of such chronic delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-117. - Licensee required to report and pay tax; maintain appropriate records. 
It shall be the duty of every licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this article, and such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due under this article, and any other information as may be required by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of every such licensee, moreover, to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all invoices and other records of such alcoholic beverages, which are taxable under this article, and the sales of such alcoholic beverages and all such books, invoices, and other records shall be open to examination by the city clerk or her duly authorized agents at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Secs. 3-118, 3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERER 

Sec. 3-120. - Authority to sell; license required. 
Alcoholic beverage caterers may operate in the incorporated area of the city only under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-121. - Eligibility for license. 
Applicants for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license to sell wine and/or beer and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits for consumption off-premises in conjunction with an authorized catered function must also possess a valid license issued by the city for the retail consumption on-premises of the same alcoholic beverage(s). 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-122. - License fees. 
Before such license is granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating alcoholic beverage caterers, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling wine to be consumed on the premises, per year ..... $500.00 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling beer and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises, per year ..... 500.00 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling distilled spirits to consumed on the premises, per year ..... 2,000.00 
(4)  A combination license for alcoholic beverage caterers selling wine and beer and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises, per year ..... 750.00 
(5)  A combination license for alcoholic beverage caterers selling distilled spirits, wine, and beer and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises, per year ..... 2,500.00 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-123. - Sale without licenses; separate application a separate license required for each place of business. 
Wine, beer and malt beverages, and distilled spirits shall not be distributed, sold or possessed for the purposes of sale without a license granted by the city council. A separate application must be made and a separate alcoholic beverage caterer license must be obtained for each business that caters within the incorporated limits of Clarkston. Caterers who cater at more than one (1) location within the city require only a single alcoholic beverage caterer license. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 3-124. - Event permits. 
In order to distribute or sell wine, and/or beer and malt beverages, and/or distilled spirits at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply to the city for an "authorized catered function event permit." A fee as determined by the city council may be charged. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall include the name and business address of the caterer, the date, time and location of the event, and the alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. 
(2)  The "authorized catered function event permit" shall be maintained in the vehicle at all times while transporting alcoholic beverages to/from the catered event and shall be maintained at the site of the catered event during the hours alcoholic beverages are sold or distributed. 
(3)  The excise tax provided for in article V of this chapter shall not apply to catered events. 
(Ord. No. 264, 11-5-02) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION; RELATED MATTERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority relative to buildings, § 1.03(o), (p). 
Cross reference— Grills over swimming pools, § 10-18; as to rubbish from building operations, see § 19-58; as to hours building operation permitted and permit therefor, see § 10-16(8); excavations in streets, § 16-5; street construction, § 16-8 et seq.; as to powers and duties of building inspector in connection with zoning, see App. A, § 1500. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION OF STATE LAW 

Sec. 5-1. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City of Clarkston to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(7)  International Residential Code. 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendices H, I, J, K. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code. 
(3)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendices H, I, J. 
(4)  Standard Gas Code. 
(5)  CABO One and Two-Family Dwelling Code. 
(c)  The following codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Existing Building Code. 
(2)  Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(d)  The Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Codes is adopted insofar as it does not conflict with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes. 
(e)  The city also adopts the State Minimum Standards Codes as defined by O.C.G.A § 8-2-20(9). 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Secs. 5-2—5-9. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT OF ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 5-10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Division 2 is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-11. - Code remedial. 
(a)  These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, ans shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof-which are public safety, health, and general welfare-through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system, or plan or their adequacy. The City of Clarkston, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tor for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-12. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gal appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its, orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices referenced in section 5-1(b) of this chapter shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Standards referenced in the text of construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-13. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing systems shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the city. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-14. - Building department. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department to be called the building department which shall be a division of the public works department. The duties of the department may be contracted out in full or part to a third party entity. 
(b)  An officer, employee, or third party independent contractor connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. An officer, employee, or third party independent contractor that works for the department shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or is in conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Any officer, employee, or third party independent contractor charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee of the city because of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He or she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the city council for any and all appeals of his decisions. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06; Ord. No. 345, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 5-15. - Building official. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  (1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  (1)  The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-16. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the Building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the side or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications and of drawings, including but not limited to, floor plans depicting the layout of each room of a building and showing the dimensions thereof, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications, floor plans, and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of Georgia regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies; 
b.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high; 
c.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicated rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accord with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads, and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed, and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has shown the lines of the public street on which he or she proposes to build, erect, or locate said building and it clearly shows that the street lines are not encroached upon by the structure. 
(e)  Compliance with licensing regulations. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. One (1) of more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon the affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place and at his expense, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed and acceptable to the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city council have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems has been paid. 
(2)  Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required normal fee. 
(3)  The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules set by the city council. 
(5)  If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including material and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, form time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (6) below. He or she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he or she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his or her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained ins such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready of occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground Inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In inspection to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See Section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation as been installed correctly on any slab on grad foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready of occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of the ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical system. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed with first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes of the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two (2) sets of detail drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when his is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pound per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or deface, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06; Ord. No. 345, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 5-17. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his or her agent, by an approved testing laboratior or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06; Ord. No. 345, § 2, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 5-18. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the city council whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  The equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The city council, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others; 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; and 
(5)  That grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the city council may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(d)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building offical may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
(e)  Decisions. The city council shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the city council shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the city council reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant and copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two (2) weeks after filing. Every decision of the city council shall be final, and subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-19. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section. 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 1, 12-7-06) 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 411 , §§ 1, 2, adopted July 6, 2017 designated §§ 5-20, 5-21 as Div. 1, "International Property Maintenance Code" and added provisions entitled as Div. 2, "City of Clarkston Local Property Maintenance Code." 
Cross reference— As to trailers, temporary structures, etc., see § 5-12 and App. A; nuisance abatement, § 5-431 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 5-20. - Property maintenance code adopted. 
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of City of Clarkston, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the City of Clarkston, in the State of Georgia for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the City of Clarkston are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 5-21. 
( Ord. No. 388, § 1, 6-2-15 ) 
Sec. 5-21. - Amendments to adopted property maintenance code. 
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Clarkston 
(2)  Section 103.5. Delete this provision of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(3)  Section 110.3. Delete this provision of the International Property Maintenance Code and replace with "If the owner fails to comply the City will initiate a nuisance abatement action in Municipal Court." 
(4)  Section 112.4. Insert: $250 to $1,000 
(5)  Section 302.4. Insert: Twelve (12) inches 
(6)  Section 304.14. Insert: April 1 st to September 30 th 
(7)  Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 st to March 31 st 
(8)  Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 st to March 31 st 
( Ord. No. 388, § 2, 6-2-15 ) 
Secs. 5-22—5-24. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY OF CLARKSTON LOCAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 5-25. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this division is: 
(1)  To establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and buildings in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and genera! welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  To enhance and promote the maintenance of real property and by so doing, improve the liability, appearance and economic conditions of the community; 
(3)  To ensure that real properties do not reach such a state of deterioration or disrepair as to cause the depreciation of the value of surrounding property or be materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements; 
(4)  This division is not to be used as a vindictive or malicious tool by one person against another. 
(b)  The local property maintenance code provisions of this division are intended to be enforced in addition to the International Property Maintenance Code adopted as division 1 of this article. To the extent that the two divisions conflict, the provisions of this division 2 shall control. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-26. - Scope. 
This division shall apply to every building and premises within the city, including all existing structures and every structure that may be erected in the future. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-27. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division: 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or material of any kind. 
Carport is defined as a structure open on one (1) or more sides primarily designed for the garaging and temporary storage of one (1) or more automobiles which is incident to the use of a single or multiple family dwelling. A carport may be attached to the primary structure or detached. Any garage without a door shall be considered a carport for the purpose of this article. 
Director. The director of public works, the chief of police, or anyone designated to carry out enforcement of this article by either of them. 
Dwelling. Any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such structure is occupied or vacant. 
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Maintenance. The act of keeping property, buildings or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building; or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises; or recorded in the official records of the state or county as holding title to the premises; or otherwise having control of the premises, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon and the open space portions of a lot, plot or parcel. 
Sewage. Liquids, solid waste or waste matter carried off by sewage disposal systems or drains. 
Temporary trash receptacle. All dumpsters, dump trucks or other types of receptacle, used for holding trash at a location for a set period of time and designed to be removed by motorized vehicles with refuse left in place. 
Trash. Combustible and noncombustible waste material, excluding garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair. In order to be competed in a workmanlike condition, maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable manufacturer's specifications, ordinances and laws. 
Weeds. All rank vegetative growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Yard trimmings. All leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities. 
Terms not defined herein shall have the same meaning as provided in article IV of the city's zoning ordinance. If not defined herein or in the zoning ordinance, words shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the words "premises," or "building," are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5-28—5-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-30. - Fences and walls. 
Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences and walls shall be free from loose or rotting materials to the extent that they have become unsafe or an eyesore and shall have braces and supports attached to or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-31. - Grading and drainage. 
All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on the premises and within any building located thereon, with the exception of approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-32. - Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation. 
Premises shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of twelve (12) inches in height It shall be the independent responsibility of the owner, occupant, and operator of the premises to cut and remove grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation as often as may be necessary, to maintain the premises in compliance with this article and to use every precaution to prevent the same growing on such premises as to become a nuisance. Premises shall be maintained to side and rear property lines and to the curb or edge of pavement. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-33. - Open and outdoor storage. 
The open or outdoor storage of any used or damaged lumber, building materials, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, asphalt, cans, bottles, glass, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative, or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household appliances or fixtures, yard waste or equipment (excluding residential lawn maintenance equipment), shall not be permitted for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Refer to the city health and sanitation ordinance for additional requirements on the storage of garbage, rubbish, refuse and other litter being stored on private property. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Premises where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet and is for the personal use of the owner or occupant; 
(3)  Building materials on hand for a construction project for which an active building permit has been issued by the city. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-34. - Enclosures for trash receptacles and dumpsters. 
(a)  All new construction, development or redevelopment in any zone of the city, except single family residential zones, shall provide an enclosure around all dumpsters and trash receptacles. Said enclosure shall be of sufficient height to hide the dumpster or receptacle from view from all public streets and rights-of-way. The enclosure shall provide adequate clearances for trash collection vehicles to remove, replace or empty the dumpster or trash receptacle. Gates shall be provided for access which may be closed and secured. 
(b)  All business locations within the city shall maintain its dumpsters and/or trash receptacles within such an enclosure at all times except when being emptied. Enclosures with gates shall be closed and secured. The area around the dumpster or trash receptacle, including the area within the enclosure, shall be kept and maintained free of trash and debris. Enclosures shall be maintained in good condition and repaired and replaced as necessary. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-35. - Location of dumpsters and trash receptacles. 
All dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be maintained a minimum of thirteen (13) feet from any curb or right-of-way of any public street. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-36. - Regulation and permitting of temporary trash receptacles. 
(a)  No person, corporation, or other entity shall place a temporary trash receptacle within the city without having first obtained a permit for such temporary trash receptacle from the city clerk and having paid a permitting fee of one hundred twenty-five ($125.00) for each such temporary trash receptacle. The permit application shall contain the name and telephone number of the responsible party, the location of the temporary trash receptacle, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the temporary trash receptacle. 
(b)  Permits granted under this section shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days. Upon written application and upon payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), the city clerk may extend the permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Two (2) additional extensions may be granted upon written application and payment of an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each extension. If the use of the temporary trash receptacle is on a construction site, additional extensions may be granted but not to exceed the time of actual construction on the property. 
(c)  No temporary trash receptacle shall be located in such a way as to interfere with or hinder the approach of any emergency vehicle or emergency responder to any building, structure, fire lane, fire hydrant, fire protective feature or emergency connection. If the temporary trash receptacle is placed on any public street, the location shall be approved prior to placement by the director to insure that there is no interference with the free flow of traffic. 
(d)  The responsible party shall not allow any such temporary trash receptacle to overflow or to allow accumulation of trash, rubbish or debris around the receptacle. 
(e)  ln addition to the enforcement provisions of this division, violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. The city also reserves the right to remove, at the responsible person's expense, any temporary trash receptacle that does not have a valid permit or which has an expired permit. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-37. - Sanitation. 
All premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of trash, rubbish or garbage. The storage and disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with the City Code, health and sanitation ordinance, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-38. - Rodent harborage. 
All buildings and premises shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-39. - Sidewalks and driveways. 
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-41. - Stagnant water prohibited. 
Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. No owner, operator or occupant shall permit any accumulation of stagnant water Upon any premises. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-42. - Pools, tubs, and spas—Safety fence required. 
(a)  All outdoor swimming pools, private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches (two (2) feet) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence around the exterior of the pool, the top of which shall be at least sixty (60) inches above grade of the poof measured on the side of the fence which faces away from the swimming pool. Gates to the fence shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  All gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Self-closing and self- latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches or more from the gatepost. 
(2)  Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool. 
(3)  Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty-four (54) inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following: 
a.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate; and 
b.  The gate and fence or barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half (0.5) inch within eighteen (18) inches of the release mechanism. 
(b)  No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-43. - Retention ponds to be fenced. 
(a)  Every retention pond designed to accumulate stormwater shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier around the exterior of the pond that shall be at least sixty (60) inches in height at all points. Any gate to the required fence or barrier shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  All gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Self-closing and self- latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches or more from the gatepost. 
(2)  Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool. 
(3)  Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty-four (54) inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following: 
a.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate; and 
b.  The gate and fence or barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half (0.5) inch within eighteen (18) inches of the release mechanism. 
(b)  No existing retention pond shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-44. - Abandoned wells. 
All abandoned weds within the city must be filled, capped, or enclosed so as to prevent any hazard to the public health or safety. Any owner, operator, or occupant who fails to fill, cap or enclose an abandoned well within ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the city to fill, cap or enclose such abandoned well shall be subject to the penalties provided for in this article. For purposes of this section, every underground accumulation of water not actively being used for drinking purposes shall be considered an "abandoned well." 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-45. - Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. There shall be no dead, dying, damaged, diseased or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin or insects, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a reasonably likely risk of physical injury to the public. 
(b)  Tree stumps. Tree stumps visible from a public street greater than twelve (12) inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than thirty (30) days after the tree has been cut. 
(c)  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than thirty (30) days. Cut firewood that is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-46. - Exterior surface treatment. 
All exterior building surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. The owner, occupant or operator of any building shall cover with paint, wash off or remove by other means alt graffiti, vulgar language, gang related symbols or other painting on the outside of a building that is not related to a sign permitted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-47. - Premises identification. 
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property or on a mailbox visible from the right-of-way so that emergency services may readily identify the address of the building. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-48. - Windows. 
Windows of occupied buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass windowpanes or with a transparent substitute approved by the director, which are without open cracks, broken glass or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window. For unoccupied buildings, the owner or operator may elect to securely board up one (1) or more windows if the glass becomes broken or damaged. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-49. - Carports to be maintained in an orderly fashion. 
Under any carport, there shall not be excessive accumulations of trash, debris or storage. Storage within a carport shall not prevent the parking of a vehicle within the carport. Excessive and disorderly storage shall be removed or put in good order upon notice from the city. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5-50—5-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-60. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforced by the police chief, the director of public works or either of their duly authorized representative or by any other agency or individual designated by the city council to enforce this division. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-61. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building who has received a compliance order or upon whom a citation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or citation issued by the city and shall furnish to the director a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or citation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or any future compliance order that may be entered as a result of a pending citation. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-62. - Owner's right of entry. 
Every occupant of a building shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintaining, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this division or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-63. - City's right of entry. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who has reason to believe that a health or safety threat exists and who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents a valid warrant signed by an authorized county magistrate. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties on public property or the common areas of any apartment or condominium development. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-64. - Subpoena power. 
The director shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring any occupant, operator, or owner, of any premises under inspection, investigation, or who have been accused of a violation this division to appear in municipal court. The director shall also have the power to issue subpoenas to occupants, operators, and/or owners to produce written records related to the premises under inspection or investigation. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-65. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or occupant to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this division. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-66. - Notice of violation. 
Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner, occupant, or operator. The notice shali contain a deadline of no less than two (2) days and not more than thirty (30) days for compliance, which may be extended by the director. If the owner, occupant or operator has received a notice of violation of any provision of this chapter within the preceding twenty-four-month period no additional notice of violation under this section shall be required before issuing a citation for any subsequent alleged violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-67. - City's right to remedy violation. 
If any owner, operator, or occupant fails or refuses to comply with this division within the specified deadline of the director, the city, through its agents and employees, may go upon such premises and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this division. The expense incurred in correcting this condition on such premises and any administrative costs involved shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of such premises. A bill for such services shall be promptly sent to the owner of the premises on which such services where performed by the city. Should said amount go unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days following the mailing of said bill via certified mail, the city may institute a lawsuit or place a lien on said property to seek recovery of the amounts expended by the city including applicable interest and attorney's fees. This provision is not exclusive of any other rights and remedies available to the city under its charter and laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Sec. 5-68. - Noncompliance. 
If any owner, operator or occupant fails to bring any premises in to compliance with this division in accordance with a notice of violation, the director shall issue a citation for the violator to appear in municipal court. The citation shall specifically allege that section violated and the nature of such violation. The citation shall be served by either personal service or certified mail. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5-69—5-79. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-80. - Penalties. 
Any owner, operator, or occupant violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, upon conviction in the municipal court, and each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this division shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. A fine imposed under this division shall be no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. 
( Ord. No. 411 , § 2, 7-6-17) 
Secs. 5-81—5-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 338, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 2009, repealed former Art. III, §§ 5-100—5-120, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following: Ord. No. 91, Arts. I—V, 12-3-79; Ord. No. 100, §§ 1—3, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 136, §§ 1—4, 4-7-87. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-100. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambark and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-101. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Clarkston. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.2), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-102. - Designation of article administrator. 
The director of public works or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.3), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-103. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purpose of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for DeKalb County, dated [date not specified], with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Clarkston; or 
b.  Any base flood study authorized by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Clarkston. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Clarkston; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authorized by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at DeKalb County Watershed Management, 1580 Roadhaven Drive, Stone Mountain, Georgia 30083. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.4), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-104. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.5), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-105. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.6), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-106. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Clarkston or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 1.7), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-107. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them.] 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director of public works' interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A99, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 5-103. All streams with a draining area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flooding having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the contraction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent change of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Clarkston to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include this improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 2), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-108—5-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5-120. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Clarkston a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria for this article. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 3.1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-121. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 5-151(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 5-151(2); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevation, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 3.2), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-122. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director of public works a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final evaluation certificate shall be provided after completion made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The director of public works shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 3.3), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-123. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director of public works shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the director of public works shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the director of public works shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director of public works shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director of public works and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 3.4), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-124—5-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 5-130. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(A)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Clarkston. If future-conditions evaluation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-131. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Clarkston. If floodway data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.2), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-132. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than one-hundredth (0.01) foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations with the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 5-133; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Clarkston using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.3), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-133. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 5-153 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.4), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-134. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood water, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased floodheights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.5), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-135. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 4.6), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-136—5-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 5-150. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal building (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-151. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 5-150, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-150(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to evaluate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-150(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of public works. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the director of public works to be floodedproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with the accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director of public works. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 5-150(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for Residential buildings—Substantial improvements (subsection 5-151(1)b.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 5-132, 5-133 and 5-134 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 5-150(7). 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.2), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-152. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.3), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-153. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the director of public works shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other sources, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 5-150(5). 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.4), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-154. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the floor depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 5-150(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.5), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-155. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 5-121; 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Clarkston to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 5.6), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-156—5-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 5-160. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and city council as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the City of Clarkston may appeal such decision to the DeKalb County Superior Court as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city and the mayor and city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The director of public works shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and the mayor and city council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city and the mayor and city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 6), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-161—5-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-170. - Violations. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 7), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-171. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the City of Clarkston determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 7.1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 5-172. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City of Clarkston may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such persons shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1(Attach. § 7.2), 9-1-09) 
Secs. 5-173—5-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROTECTION OF WETLANDS 

Sec. 5-200. - Purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands in the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-201. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them:] 
Generalized wetlands map: The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity: An activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-202. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the City of Clarkston, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of the jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Clarkston, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal, state or county permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-203. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement for local permit or permission: No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within fifty (50) feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city clerk using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-204. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of [a] right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-205. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-206. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Upon receiving an application for a building permit or a development permit, the city clerk shall determine whether the area covered by the permit is in a wetlands protection district of the city as defined herein, or within fifty (50) feet of such a district. If the city clerk determines that the area covered by the requested permit is not within a wetlands protection district, or within fifty (50) feet of such a district, the clerk shall so note upon the application and no further action shall be required hereunder. If the city clerk determines that such area is within a wetlands protection district of the city, or within fifty (50) feet of such a district, the clerk shall not approve the permit and shall immediately notify the applicant of such determination and the requirement under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act that a determination must be obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as to whether the area to be developed lies within an area containing wetlands. No city permit for building or development shall be issued until such time as the applicant obtains and presents to the city clerk one of the following: 
(1)  A written determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that no wetlands are on the area to be developed; 
(2)  A Section 404 Permit; or 
(3)  A letter of permission from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers allowing development on the wetland area. 
(b)  Should the code enforcement officer of the city find that unpermitted activity is taking place on areas which he knows or reasonably believes are wetlands, he shall immediately contact the appropriate officials of DeKalb County who conduct building and/or development inspections requesting that they inspect and issue a stop work order, if appropriate, and shall also immediately notify the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 5-207. - Relationship with article III of chapter 5. 
The provisions of this article IV are meant to supplement the requirements of article III of chapter 5 of the Code of the city and shall not be construed or interpreted to substitute for such requirements. This article IV must be read and interpreted in conjunction with article III of this chapter 5. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Secs. 5-208—5-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREE PROTECTION 

Sec. 5-301. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to provide standards for the preservation and/or replacement of the city's trees because of their contribution to: 
(1)  The health of its citizens in improved air and water quality; 
(2)  The control of flooding, noise, glare and soil erosion; 
(3)  The protection of urban wildlife; 
(4)  The maintaining and increasing of property values; and 
(5)  The beauty of the city. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-302. - Definitions. 
[For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.] 
Cover area: That area which falls within the drip line of any tree. 
Developed property: Property upon which a building, structure, pavement, or other improvements have been placed. 
Development permit: Official authorization issued by DeKalb County allowing development activities as described and provided for in section 5-1(6) of this Code. 
Drip line: A vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree canopy to the ground. 
Landscape plan: A plan indicating the location, size quantity and species of existing and replacement trees. 
Park: All publicly maintained parks having individual names. 
Planting strip: That part of a public street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line of adjoining property and that portion of the street or highway used or intended to be used for vehicular traffic. 
Protected zone: All lands which fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as yards, buffers or landscaped areas according to provisions of the City of Clarkston Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
Public: The term "public" when used as a modifier for such works as building, park, right-of-way, and similar words, shall mean "government-owned" or "government operated." 
Public places: All grounds other than parks owned by the city. 
Public tree: Any tree which exists on publicly owned or controlled property or right-of-way. 
Public works director: The public works department director of the City of Clarkston or his designee. 
Specimen tree or specimen tree stand: Any tree or group of trees within the protected zone which has been determined to be of high value because of its species, size, age or other definable criteria and so designated by the city tree consultant. 
Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of two (2) inches or more when measured at a point six (6) inches above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Undeveloped property: Property upon which no building, structure, pavement or other improvements have been placed. 
Yard area: An open space on the same lot with a building, the space being unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, with the exception of trees and other natural vegetation. 
Zoning ordinance: The zoning ordinance and land use and development regulations adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-303. - Appointment and qualifications of a city tree consultant. 
(a)  The city shall appoint a consultant on trees who shall be a person skilled and trained in the arts and sciences of municipal arboricultural, ornamental or landscape horticulture, urban forestry or other related field. 
(b)  The city tree consultant shall be called upon to advise the city regarding the specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees in public areas. The city tree consultant shall also assist staff with the review of permit requests and site development plans submitted to the city and make recommendations concerning them to the city. The city tree consultant shall conduct follow-up and final inspections as appropriate to insure compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city tree consultant shall identify and maintain a record of specimen trees and tree stands based on the following criteria: 
(1)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature; 
(2)  A tree or stand of historic significance; 
(3)  A tree or stand with exception aesthetic quality. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02; ; Ord. No. 376, § 2, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 5-304. - General rules and regulations—City property. 
(a)  Utility companies, private contractors outside governments, and individuals must apply for and procure a permit, and comply with tree protection and replacement administrative guidelines to this article to protect and preserve city properties in any modification of their landscape. Written plans outlining purpose, proposed operations, and approximate dates shall be submitted to the public works director. 
(b)  Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a planting strip in connection with paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the city shall replant such trees or replace them; provided, that if conditions prevent planting on a planting strip, this requirement will be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees of the same potential size and species are planted in an attractive manner on adjoining property or other public property. 
(c)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain on any public place of the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-305. - Applicability. 
(a)  The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to any activity on real property, including any activity which requires the issuance of a building or development permit, which affects the following: 
(1)  The covered area of specimen trees or stands; 
(2)  All undeveloped property; 
(3)  The yard areas of all developed property; and 
(4)  Public rights-of-way and parks. 
(b)  The following shall be exempt from compliance with this article: 
(1)  All privately-owned developed property, including yard areas, designated R1 single family residence by the Clarkston Zoning Ordinance and developed with a single family dwelling unless the removal of any tree is incident to any new construction on the property which requires permitting under this Code of Ordinances, subject however to the following restrictions: 
a.  No person shall cut or damage any tree which has been designated as a specimen tree or part of a stand of specimen trees without having obtained a permit as required in this Code of Ordinances; and 
b.  No person shall cut or damage more than ten (10) percent of the trees growing on any lot within the city within any twelve-month period without having first obtained a permit as required in this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Construction and maintenance of public streets, highways, rights-of-way by local, state and federal governments and public authorities. 
(3)  Any tree determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, requiring immediate removal, may be removed without obtaining a permit as herein required, upon obtaining written permission of the public works director, or his designee. 
(4)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, or other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city manager. 
(5)  Trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the county extension service, Georgia Forestry Commission, an arborist or an urban forester may be removed without obtaining a permit as herein required. Written proof of such determination must be obtained and held by the landowner for a period of one (1) year from the date the tree is removed. 
(6)  This article shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid building or soil erosion control permit issued prior to the effective date of this article, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit are observed. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 283, § 1, 6-1-04; ; Ord. No. 376, § 3, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 5-306. - Permits. 
(a)  No person, firm, organization, public agency or society shall directly or indirectly destroy or remove any trees situated on property described in section 5-305 of this article without obtaining a permit as provided herein, except for property and activities exempted in section 5-305(b). 
(b)  Permits shall be obtained by making application to the city clerk, and the application shall be referred to the city tree consultant. Permit fees shall be as established from time to time by the city council. The application, when made in conjunction with a building permit or a development permits shall also include a landscaping plan, a plan for protection of trees during construction, and any other documentation required for all areas of the parcel within a protected zone. The applicant may be required to submit a tree replacement plan if, at the discretion of the city tree consultant, replacement is deemed reasonable and suitable. Methods and standards for tree replacement and protection shall be established in administrative guidelines to this article, such guidelines to be effective upon approval by the city council. 
(c)  All landscape plans and related documentation shall be reviewed by the city tree consultant and either approved, returned for revision, or denied. If denied, the reasons shall be annotated on the landscape plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
(d)  Issuance of a building or development permit shall constitute an approval of the required landscape plan and conformance to the provisions of these regulations. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the city tree consultant relating to the application of this article may appeal to the city council for relief or reconsideration. Such appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the decision being appealed. Notice of such appeal shall be given to the city tree consultant prior to any consideration of the appeal by the city council. Appeals shall be granted only for errors of interpretation or where unique natural features of the site are such that application of these regulations would create an undue hardship for the property owner, and in other instances where an undue hardship is created for the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-307. - Protection of trees. 
(a)  All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near an excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four (4) feet high and eight (8) feet square, or at a minimum distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk, whichever is greater. Any barrier with lessor dimensions than those specified above shall be subject to approval by the city tree consultant. All building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
(b)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnel, trenches or lay any drive within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(c)  Unless specifically authorized by the public works director, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any public tree or shrub; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree or shrub; allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to plants to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any person or person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten (10) feet over sidewalks, and twelve (12) feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of sixteen (16) feet. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-308. - Restrictions on building permits. 
Any person removing a tree or trees from property zoned R1 and using the exemption provided in subsection 5-305(b)(1) of this article shall not be granted a building permit from the city for a period of one (1) year following removal of any tree unless he can show: 
(1)  That the trees removed were not in the area of the proposed construction; and 
(2)  That the trees removed would not have interfered with the proposed construction. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-309. - Planting of trees. 
In any instance where the cutting of any paved sidewalk in a right-of-way of the city is necessary for the planting of any shrub or tree, such work shall be performed by the public works department of the city, or shall be done according to plans approved by and a permit issued by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-310. - Easements to plant trees on private property. 
The city is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the city for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees on such property, in consideration for which said private property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the city may plant. Provided, however, that any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of two (2) years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the city to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees. Provided, further, that under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted thereon and shall also agree to hold the city harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-311. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to cancellation of any building or development permit and shall cease all activity on site upon notice of a charge hereunder by the code enforcement officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 5-312. - Administrative guidelines. 
The mayor is directed to create, in cooperation with the city tree consultant, certain guidelines for the administration of this article which guidelines shall be approved by the city council and thereby be given weight of an ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 2, 8-6-02) 
Secs. 5-313—5-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRENCHING 

Sec. 5-400. - Definitions. 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth(s surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, form by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as a result of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or a successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing, or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench is a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-401. - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in the compliance with the provisions of this Article VI and in compliance with any applicable laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States or any rules and regulations of OSHA, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-402. - Adoption of federal regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly Part 1926, Sub part P-Excavations, Trenching and Shoring, Section 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, and 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended are adopted as a part of this Article VI the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-403. - Certificate required. 
(a)  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)  In the event any person who holds a permit from the city is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the permit may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the permit may be reinstalled one (1) time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-404. - Permit required. 
(a)  No excavation or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization form the same has been obtained from the building official. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits must be conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
(b)  No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-405. - Inspection. 
The building official shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspections shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify the existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards herein above adopted. The inspector may operate pursuant to a contract between the city and a third-party entity. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-406. - Violation. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article VI regulating trenching and excavating within the City shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any person found guilty is subject to punishment as proscribed in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 5-407. - Appeals. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal the decision of the building official to the city council in the manner proscribed in section 15-18 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 319, § 4, 12-7-06) 
Secs. 5-408—5-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 5-431. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The city council of the city finds and declares that within the city limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or other applicable building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city, or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  The city council of the city further finds and declares that within the limits of the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(c)  The city council of the city further finds and declares that there exist within the limits of the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; and 
(d)  The city council of the city further finds and declares that there exist within the limits of the city vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of such dwellings, buildings and structures. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-432. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the city council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-433. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of O.C.G.A. after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of O.C.G.A., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term dwellings, buildings or structures shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia, including every mortgagee of record; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner of records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple. 
Public authority means the city manager or the building official or their respective designees, and any officer of the City of Clarkston, DeKalb County, Georgia or the State of Georgia with responsibilities relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the City of Clarkston, specifically including the DeKalb County Fire Marshal, the city police chief, and the city codes enforcement officers. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with all applicable codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated, which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-434. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building or structure, or property within the city limits of the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances that regulate and prohibit activities on property and that declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(b)  The city manager, the building official, and each of their designees, are designated as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure, or property. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may direct the city attorney to issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of the City of Clarkston, Georgia, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, then the order shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, then the order shall require the owner within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purpose of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia Appraiser Classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41 of O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such abatement action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or by any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer, the city commissioners of the city, and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city manager, or his or her designee, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-435. - Collection of lien. 
(a)  The lien provided for in paragraph (g) of section 5-434 shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by section 5-442. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this section shall transmit to the city manager, or his or her designee, a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or his or her designee, to collect the amount of the lien, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall remit the amount collected to the city council. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city manager, or his or her designee, of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city manager, or his or her designee, in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(e)  The city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city, agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-436. - Appeal. 
Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-437. - Other citations. 
The public officers designated in subsection 5-434(b), and any designated agent of such officers, may issue citations to the owner, occupants, and/or persons in possession of the property and premises for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Any owner who fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to subsection 5-434(d) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, thereof shall be punished as provided by law. Any person removing the notice provided for in subsection 5-434(e) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-438. - No limitation of other nuisance abatement powers. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city commissioners of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-439. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and constitute conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-440. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purpose of the article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Sec. 5-441. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints filed pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in DeKalb County once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
Sec. 5-442. - Filing of lis pendens. 
A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 389, § 1(Attach.), 7-7-15 ) 
Chapter 5.5 - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 247, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2000, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 23, Arts. I and II. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of subject matter and to conform to the format of this Code, the editor has renumbered the provisions of Ord. No. 247 as a new Ch. 5.5 as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Telecommunications services, Ch. 17.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5.5-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition other becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system mean any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Clarkston. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to any inhabitants within the franchise area. 
May is permissive. 
Open video system means "open video system" as defined by section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Ordinance means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, railroad right-of-way, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, an amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Telecommunications Service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 5.5-2—5.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 5.5-21. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and grantee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-22. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain a cable system or open video system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed cable system or open video system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed cable system or open video system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of fund statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(c)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
(2)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(3)  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; 
(4)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
(5)  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
(6)  A detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(d)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required by the council, or by any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-23. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-24. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-25. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at city hall during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-26. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; 
(5)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; and 
(6)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-27. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies at it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council, if it elects to further consider any application(s), shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the applications(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearings(s) in accordance with applicable law. Unless otherwise directed, the public hearing on this subject matter shall be held at or be a part of a regular meeting of the city council. If placed on the agenda of such meeting, unless otherwise required by law, it shall not be necessary to otherwise advertise such public hearing. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-28. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable licenses. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise. 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services which are subject of the franchise. 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both. 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled. 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise. 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee. 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee. 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto. 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods. 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations. 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city. 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city. 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission. 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise. 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise, and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-29. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-30. - Application to existing franchisees. 
This chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this chapter, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 247, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 5.5-31. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 328, § 1, 2-2-08) 
Sec. 5.5-32. - Authorized designee. 
The city clerk is authorized, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five-percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 328, § 2, 2-2-08) 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to acquire, etc., § 1.03(j). 
State Law reference— Authority to act as trustee, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-37-4, 36-37-5. 

Sec. 6-1. - Improvements, changes; authority of city manager. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to control and supervise any improvements, changes in contour of lots or any other change of any kind or character to any of the lots located in the cemetery property of the city. 
No such changes or improvements shall be made to any of such lots without first securing the approval of city manager or his designee and then only under the direct supervision and according to the city manager's or designee's directions. 
(Code 1968, § 7-1; ; Ord. No. 376, § 4, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 6-2. - Sale of lots—Prices. 
The price of lots in city cemetery property shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 7-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Purchase by nonresidents. 
Any nonresident of the city desiring to purchase any one or more of the lots in a city cemetery shall pay therefor an amount twice the amount established under section 6-2 as the purchase price of such lots. 
(Code 1968, § 7-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Purchase by residents; sale to nonresidents. 
The price of lots in a city cemetery shall apply to bona fide and legal residents of the city or to freeholders within the city. Any such resident or freeholder, before purchasing any lots in the cemetery, shall satisfy the city manager or his designee that such prospective purchaser is a legal resident or freeholder of the city, and such purchaser shall agree not to sell or dispose of any such lot or part thereof to a nonresident of the city without first obtaining written consent from the city manager or his designee. In the event such consent is obtained and such resale is made, then such new purchaser or transferee shall pay to the city an amount equal to the original purchase price of the lot. In the event of a violation of this section, the lot shall revert to the city, and the owner thereof shall be reimbursed in the amount originally paid therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 7-4; ; Ord. No. 376, § 5, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 6-5. - Charges for opening graves. 
The charge by the city for opening a grave in a city cemetery shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 7-5) 
Sec. 6-6. - Placement of tombstones or markers. 
When a tombstone or marker is placed above a grave by any person licensed to perform such work in a city cemetery, such tombstone or marker shall be set in a concrete foundation not less than five (5) feet in depth. When such work is performed by the city the same shall be done at a cost to the lot owner as determined by the city council. The minimum price for setting two (2) by one (1) markers shall be as established by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any lot owner, or any agent or employee of such lot owner, to place any tombstone or marker in a manner otherwise than as provided in this section. 
(Code 1968, § 7-6) 
Sec. 6-7. - Mausoleums, tombs, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or build on any lot in a city cemetery any mausoleum, tomb or other edifice of like kind or character or any edifice other than what is commonly termed a monument or marker and in keeping with the monuments and markers now erected in the cemetery. Upon the violation of this section, the city reserves the right to remove any such lot and to assess the costs of such removal against the owner of the lot or against the person erecting the edifice. 
(Code 1968, § 7-7) 
Sec. 6-8. - Tree planting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree in a city cemetery. 
(Code 1968, § 7-8) 
Sec. 6-9. - Shrubbery over three feet in height prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant upon any lot in a city cemetery any shrubbery which shall exceed three (3) feet in height at the time of such planting, or which shall be allowed to grow to a height of three (3) feet, without having first obtained from the city manager or his designee written permission to plant such shrubbery. 
(Code 1968, § 7-9; Ord. No. 376, § 6, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 6-10. - Removal of trees and shrubbery. 
The city reserves the right to remove any prohibited trees or shrubbery from any lot in a city cemetery and to assess the costs of such removal against the owner of the lot or against the person planting such trees or shrubbery. 
(Code 1968, § 7-10) 
Sec. 6-11. - Animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal within a city cemetery. 
(Code 1968, § 7-11) 
Sec. 6-12. - Erection of walls, curbs, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or erect any wall, coping or curbing in, around or on any lot in a city cemetery, without first obtaining special permission from the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 7-12) 
Sec. 6-13. - Obstruction of walks or drives. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct any of the walks or drives in a city cemetery. 
(Code 1968, § 7-13) 
Chapter 7 - COURT; CRIMINAL PROCEDURE; PRISONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for punishment of violators, § 1.03(v); authority to provide for commitment and working of prisoners, § 1.03(r); court established, § 3.04. 
Cross reference— Fee and costs bill, § 8-1. 

Sec. 7-1. - Powers and duties of judge. 
(a)  Holding court. It shall be the duty of the judge of the city to hold a court to be called the "mayor's court", at such time and place within the city as the judge may order and appoint, for trial of all offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Imposing sentence; enforcing judgments. The judge is hereby fully authorized to inflict such fines and penalties upon offenders as such judge may deem proper and just, not exceeding the limits allowed by law, or prescribed by ordinance, and to enforce the judgment of the court by the attachment of the person by execution; and to punish witnesses for nonattendance or other contempts as a court of record may do. The judge is hereby authorized to impose such alternative sentences in addition to fine and/or imprisonment as in such judge's judgment may seem meet and proper. 
Charter reference— Maximum punishment, § 3.06. 
Cross reference— Maximum punishment, § 1-7. 
(c)  Contempt. The judge shall have power to issue attachments and inflict summary punishment for contempt of court. Such power shall not extend to any case except the misbehavior of any person in the presence of the court, or so near thereto as to obstruct the administration of justice, the misbehavior of any of the officers of the court in their official transactions and the disobedience or resistance by any officer of the court, party, witness or other person to any lawful writ, process, order, rule or command of the court. The mayor's court shall have power to punish any person in contempt as aforesaid as provided by law. 
Charter reference— Punishment for contempt, § 3.06. 
(d)  Binding over defendants. If, after an investigation of any case, it shall appear that the court has no jurisdiction to determine it, the judge shall require the defendant to enter into bond, conditioned to appear before the next term of the court having jurisdiction, to answer for such offense, which bond shall be turned over to the proper officer of the court. In default of such bond the judge shall have power to commit the defendant to jail to answer the charge at the next term of the court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(e)  Court rules. The judge may establish such local court rules of procedure, not inconsistent with law, as such judge may deem necessary for the orderly administration of justice. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 1, 1-2-79) 
Charter reference— Authority to bind over defendants, § 3.06; procedure, § 3.09. 
State Law reference— Authority to appoint a judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; authority to impose sentence, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; authority to bind over or commit offenders against the criminal law, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22. 
Sec. 7-2. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of clerk of the mayor's court of the city. 
(b)  Appointment. The clerk of such court shall be appointed by the judge, subject to approval of the mayor, and shall hold office at the will of the mayor. 
(c)  Duties. The clerk of the mayor's court shall keep the dockets of the court; attend the meetings of the court; certify to and affix the seal of the court to transcripts of records of the court; be under the direction of the judge, and perform such acts in connection with the clerk's duties as may be required by the judge. The duties of the city clerk as custodian of the official records of the mayor's court shall remain the same, but the city clerk shall not be responsible for and shall not be required to certify to the accuracy of said records. 
(d)  Salary. The salary of the clerk of the mayor's court shall be fixed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(e)  Clerk pro tem. Pending the illness or absence of the clerk of the mayor's court, the judge may appoint from the members of the police department of the city a clerk pro tempore, to perform the duties of the regular clerk; the person so appointed to receive no compensation for acting as such clerk pro tempore other than such person's regular salary as a member of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 2, 1-2-79) 
Sec. 7-3. - Court cashier. 
(a)  Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of court cashier. 
(b)  Appointment. The court cashier shall be appointed by the mayor, and shall hold office at the will of the mayor. 
(c)  Duties. The court cashier shall attend all sessions of court; handle and receipt all monies paid in or out in connection with the mayor's court; balance such sums in the manner prescribed by the court; report and deliver all such sums to the city clerk at the end of each court session; and be ultimately accountable to the mayor and council as to the proper handling and disposition of such sums in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 87, § 3, 1-2-79) 
Sec. 7-4. - Cash bonds. 
The chief of police, the captains of police and the desk sergeants of the police department of the city are hereby designated to accept cash bonds under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10, whereby designated officials of municipalities are authorized to accept cash bonds and to issue a receipt to the applicant for same. 
All cash bonds so accepted shall be posted or accepted at the office of the police department in the city hall and at no other place, and likewise at the time such bond is so posted or accepted a receipt shall be issued at such office and at no other place. 
(Code 1968, § 2-10) 
Charter reference— Authority of court to establish bail, § 3.06. 
State Law reference— Cash bond authorized, issuing receipt and entering on docket, O.C.G.A. §§ 9-10-10, 17-6-4. 
Sec. 7-5. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Any person who has been convicted in the mayor's court for the violation of any provision of this Code or other city ordinance, rule or regulation, and who has taken such case to the superior court by certiorari, and has given bond with surety conditioned that such person will personally appear and abide by the final judgment, order or sentence upon such person in such case, shall have the bond, when the case has been finally heard and determined by the superior court, or by the court of appeals upon writ of error, forfeited in the following manner: 
(1)  The chief of police of the city shall give the principal, if to be found, and the sureties in such bond, five (5) days' notice, requiring such principal to be, and requiring such sureties to have such principal, present in the mayor's court on some day and hour therein named, to abide such final order, judgment or sentence upon such principal in such case. The notice may be served in person or by leaving the same at the most notorious place of abode of such principal and sureties, or at the principal's place of business. 
(2)  Upon failure of such principal to personally appear and abide the final judgment, order or sentence upon such principal in such case, the judge presiding shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on any day and hour therein named, not to be less than five (5) days from the passage of such rule, why they should not pay the amount of such bond. 
(3)  A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal, if to be found, and the sureties, by the chief of police of the city personally, or by leaving such copy of the place of business or the most notorious place of abode of the sureties, at least three (3) days before the time therein set for hearing of the same. 
(4)  If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge presiding shall proceed to enter judgment against such principal and sureties for the amount of such bond, and the city clerk shall issue execution for the amount of such judgment and place such execution in the hands of the chief of police, who shall proceed to collect such execution by levy and sale as in case of tax executions. 
(Code 1968, § 2-8) 
State Law reference— Judgment against bail, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71. 
Chapter 7.5 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 168, adopted Oct. 1, 1991, amended this Code by creating a new Ch. 10.5 pertaining to emergency management. This chapter was redesignated by the editor as Ch. 7.5 to preserve the alphabetical order of chapters in the Code. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7.5-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term emergency management shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions may include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 7.5-2. - Office of the DeKalb County Emergency Management Director. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a part of the DeKalb County Emergency Management Unit. The chief executive officer of the county shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the DeKalb County Emergency and Disaster Operations Plan emergency functions set forth in section 7.5-1 of this chapter. The plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of DeKalb County and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the DeKalb County Emergency Management Program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the DeKalb County Emergency Operating Center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the DeKalb County Emergency Operating Center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 7.5-3. - DeKalb County Emergency Management Office. 
The DeKalb County Emergency Management Office shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 7.5-1 above are assigned as follows: 
CEO, county commissioners, mayor 
Direction and control 
Police department, sheriff department 
Communications and warning 
Police services 
Evacuation 
Emergency management office 
Public information 
State military support 
Training 
Preliminary damage assessment and reporting 
Public property assistance 
Attack preparedness 
Specific hazards 
Fire department 
Search, rescue and recovery  Fire services  Hazardous materials  Radiological protection 
Public works 
Engineering  Petroleum and solid fuel services  Utilities 
DeKalb school system 
Transportation services  Food services 
Board of health 
Health and medical services 
Department of family and children services 
Social services  Shelter and temporary housing 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 7.5-4. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Clarkston, the mayor separately, or jointly with the CEO, county commissioners, or in their absences, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 7.5-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 7.5-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 168, 10-1-91) 
Chapter 8 - FINANCE; TAXATION; PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fiscal administration, Art. IV. 
Cross reference— Court cashier, § 7-3; alcoholic beverage licenses, Ch. 3; occupational license taxes, Ch. 11; mayor's and council member's compensation, §§ 2-2, 2-3. 
State Law reference— Public revenue, O.C.G.A. title 48; investment and expenditure of funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-3 et seq.; requirements as to sale of city property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; uniform standards of audit, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-10; disposition of abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - City officers' fee and costs bill—Schedule. 
The following shall be the fee and costs bill of the officers of the city: 
For each execution issued\$2.00 
For each levy\2.00 
For each execution settled\2.00 
For each marshal's deed\2.00 
All of the costs and fee bills of the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city and accurate accounts thereof shall be kept. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5) 
Charter reference— Fixing of court costs, § 3.06. 
Sec. 8-2. - Licensing of occupants of exempt property; annual occupancy permit required. 
(a)  The owners of all property which is claimed as exempt from all ad valorem property taxes pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41(a)(2) and (4) shall obtain from the city clerk an annual occupancy certificate. 
(b)  Application for the annual occupancy certificate shall be made initially within thirty (30) days of the granting of an exemption from ad valorem taxes on the property and thereafter shall be renewable annually during the month of January of each ensuing year in which the exemption is granted. There shall be no charge for the occupancy permit. 
(c)  Application for the occupancy permit shall provide for the name and address of the owner of the property, the name and address of the person in charge of activities on the property, and the maximum number of persons expected to assemble on the property pursuant to any of its activities. 
(Ord. No. 171, 1-7-92; Ord. No. 319, § 3, 12-7-06) 
Note— Formerly numbered as § 5-14. 
Secs. 8-3—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 202, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1996, created a new Art. II and added provisions designated as §§ 8-2—8-7. In order to reserve sections for future expansion, the editor has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 202 as §§ 8-21—8-26. 
State Law reference— Acceptance of credit cards, O.C.G.A. § 50-1-6. 

Sec. 8-21. - Acceptance of credit cards. 
All sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city clerk shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96; ; Ord. No. 376, § 7, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 8-22. - Discounts or administrative fees. 
A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 8-23. - Surcharges authorized. 
A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 8-24. - Right of cancellation. 
Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance or payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 8-25. - Collection of amounts due. 
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. Nothing contained herein shall alter or restrict the right of the city to place a lien upon any property within the city where such liens are authorized under the Charter or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Sec. 8-26. - Credit card payments for fines. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tender a credit card for payment of a fine arising from the violation of any city ordinance or state statute if such person knows or has reason to believe that the charges made will not be paid by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction. If final payment on a credit card payment for a fine resulting from violation of any city ordinance or state statute is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. In such event, the person who tendered the credit card for payment shall be in violation of this article and may be held in contempt of court by the judge of the mayor's court, and/or punished pursuant to the provisions of section 3.06 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 202, § 1, 8-6-96) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— As to depositing hot ashes, etc., in garbage containers, see § 19-56; as to burning leaves, rubbish, etc., on streets, etc., see § 10-14; permission to use fire hydrants and notice of damage, § 19-46. 
State Law reference— Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25. 

Sec. 9-1. - Adoption of rules and regulations of state safety fire commissioner. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., are hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of this city. 
(Code 1968, § 9-2) 
Sec. 9-2. - Duty of fire marshal, etc., to cooperate with state safety fire commissioner, etc. 
The city fire marshal, together with all other city officials, department heads and employees, shall cooperate with the state safety fire commissioner and the state fire marshal and their deputies or assistants, whenever called upon by them in the enforcement of the state safety fire law and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1968, § 9-3) 
Sec. 9-3. - Adoption of state minimum standards. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council to enforce within the City of Clarkston the latest edition the International Fire Code, a part of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(b)  When a conflict arises between the provisions of the International Fire Code and the rules and regulations promulgated by the state fire marshall under authority vested in him by O.C.G.A § 25-2-1 et. seq., the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(c)  Any person violating said fire prevention code within the city shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1968, § 9-4; Ord. No. 69, 9-8-75; Ord. No. 115, § 1, 8-2-83; Ord. No. 127, § 1, 12-3-86; Ord. No. 173, 5-5-92; Ord. No. 303, § 1, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 9-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 115, § 2, adopted Aug. 2, 1983, repealed § 9-4 in its entirety. Former § 9-4 was concerned with adoption of A.I.A. fire prevention code, and derived from Code 1968, § 9-1 and Ord. No. 69, adopted Sept. 8, 1975. In order to maintain consistency of style in the Code, the remaining sections of this chapter have not been renumbered as directed by Ord. No. 115, § 2. 
Sec. 9-5. - Gasoline in glass containers—Sale, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to sell, give, supply or furnish gasoline in glass containers. 
(Code 1968, § 9-5) 
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Purchase, possession and storage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, possess or store gasoline in glass containers. 
(Code 1968, § 9-6) 
Sec. 9-7. - Same—Transportation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in or through the city gasoline in glass containers. 
(Code 1968, § 9-7) 
Sec. 9-8. - Self-service gasoline dispensing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner of a service station, manager, operator or agent, servant or employee, on duty at such station at the time, to dispense motor fuel to the general public within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 71, 11-9-75) 
State Law reference— Authority to require license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-9. - Fireworks—Use prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to burn or discharge rockets or firecrackers or any kind of fireworks, or to explode caps or torpedoes within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 16-8) 
Sec. 9-10. - Same—Sale, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, give away or in any way dispose of any type of fireworks, or any rockets, firecrackers, dynamite caps or torpedoes within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 16-9) 
State Law reference— Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-11. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Fire lanes shall be established for all buildings set back more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a main roadway, or in any circumstance where the city determines that any property requires a minimum access corridor for emergency vehicles regardless of set back. The minimum width for any fire lane shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  All fire lanes shall be marked with approved signs. 
(c)  Fire lanes shall not be obstructed at any time or in any manner, including automobile or truck parking, attended or unattended. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 9-12. - Outdoor burning prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except as provided herein, to engage in any act of outdoor burning including the burning of trash, leaves, or yard debris whether contained or uncontained within the City of Clarkston. 
(b)  Subject to the conditions in subsection (c) of this section 9-12, the provisions of this Code section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Warming fires; 
(2)  Fires used for cooking food intended for immediate consumption; 
(3)  Fires used as part of the process of utilization of smokehouses. 
(c)  Outdoor burnings allowed under subsection (b) above are permitted upon the following conditions: 
(1)  No fire shall be kindled unless contained within a non combustible container maintained at a safe distance from any structure, wood line, or property; 
(2)  No fires shall be left unattended; 
(3)  A water source sufficient to completely extinguish the fire shall be maintained within easy reach at all times the fire is burning; 
(4)  No pressure treated wood, construction debris, or trash shall be burned; 
(5)  Any fires allowed shall create no smoke nuisance or endanger other property or structures; and 
(6)  A complaint of smoke nuisance for health reasons shall be sufficient to cause a fire to be disallowed. 
(Ord. No. 313, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 9-13. - Obstruction of fire hydrants. 
No person shall erect any fence or other structure which would obstruct the approach, observation, spoting or operation of any fire hydrant with the City of Clarkston. Further, no one shall plant or allow any vegetation which would prevent or obscure the otherwise immediate view of any fire hydrant. Any obstruction place within the immediate area around any fire hydrant shall not be placed within eighteen (18) inches of the fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Chapter 9.5 - GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 131, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1986, amended the Code by adding a new Ch. 21. In order to maintain the existing classification of subject matter and facilitate indexing, reference and use, the aforesaid has been redesignated as Ch. 9.5, and set out as enacted with only minor, nonsubstantive additions and deletions made for purposes of clarity. 
Cross reference— Zoning and review commission, § 15-1 et seq.; utilities and services, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9.5-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Clarkston Gasoline Service Station Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to any establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed by attendants at dispensing devices, and may include facilities for minor repairs and services. This chapter is hereby expressly declared to not apply to motor fuel dispensing units which are not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-3. - Permit required. 
No gasoline service station shall be built, altered or enlarged without first obtaining a special permit from the city zoning and review commission. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 306, § 1, 5-2-06) 
Cross reference— Zoning and review commission, § 15-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9.5-4. - Site plan requirements. 
A site plan indicating the dimensions of the site, the relative locations of all buildings, pump islands, tanks, signs, screening, accessways, curbing, lighting and landscaping shall be submitted with the application for a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-5. - Permit fees. 
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each pump and dispensing device to be located on the proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-6. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in the mayor's court of Clarkston shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable individually. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 131, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1986, included the penalty for the chapter as Art. VII, Miscellaneous, § 21-60, Penalty. In order to maintain Code format, the aforesaid has been redesignated as § 9.5-6 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 9.5-7—9.5-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCATION AND SITE REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public ways, Ch. 16; zoning use provisions App. A, § 1300 et seq. 

Sec. 9.5-10. - Zoning. 
Gasoline service stations shall be located in commercial and light industrial districts as a special permitted use, according to the provisions set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-11. - Location. 
There shall be a minimum distance of five hundred (500) feet measured from the nearest points of lot boundaries between a proposed gasoline service station and any existing gasoline service station or between a proposed gasoline service station and any lot occupied by a church, hospital, school, or other place of public assembly. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-11.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the term "school" shall include all public, private, church operated, for profit and non-profit establishments where children or other persons are located for the purpose of education and learning including, but not limited to, colleges, trade schools, high schools, middle schools, elementary schools, kindergartens, and day-care centers. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, distance shall be measured along a straight line from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 1, 7-7-98) 
Sec. 9.5-12. - Minimum frontage and area. 
The minimum frontage shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet and the minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-13. - Minimum building setback. 
The gasoline service station building shall be set back a minimum of sixty (60) feet from the street. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-14. - Accessways. 
No driveway approach shall be located within ten (10) feet of an adjoining property line or within twenty-five (25) feet of a street intersection. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-15. - Curb cuts. 
The width of curb openings shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet and shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet and shall not be permitted at locations that will tend to create traffic hazards. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-16. - Lighting. 
Lights to illuminate the service station site shall be directed toward the site and the light standard for such lights shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. All exterior lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjacent premises and shall also be so arranged as to not affect driver visibility adversely on adjacent thoroughfares. There shall be no flashing or revolving lights. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-17. - Refuse storage area. 
Trash and refuse shall be stored in an enclosed or walled area and shall not be visible from the exterior boundaries of the property. Refuse storage areas shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and at least six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-18. - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall cover a minimum of five (5) percent of that portion of the site not occupied by buildings or pump islands. The installation of landscaping shall be indicated on the site plan. Adequate and proper maintenance of such landscaping shall be the responsibility of the station operator. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-19. - Screening. 
Screening shall be constructed on any lot line which abuts a residential zone. The screening shall consist of a concrete or masonry wall for the entire length of the property line. The wall shall have a minimum height of four (4) feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet and shall be without opening with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-20. - Signs. 
(a)  A sign shall be posted on every dispensing device at least twelve (12) inches in height and twelve (12) inches in width, stating clearly and legibly the price per gallon, half-gallon or liter, the breakdown of applicable federal, state and local taxes and the octane rating of the fuel. 
(b)  At least one (1) sign shall be posted on the premises, clearly visible and readable from all traffic lanes in each direction on such street or streets, indicating thereon the actual price per gallon, half-gallon or liter, applicable federal, state and local taxes, each grade of motor vehicle fuel which is currently being offered for sale, sold or otherwise dispensed and the maximum or minimum purchase limits, if any. The size of such sign shall be a minimum of twelve (12) square feet, in letters no smaller than six (6) inches in height and in numerals no smaller than ten (10) inches in height. 
(c)  At least one (1) "NO SMOKING" sign, with letters at least six (6) inches tall, clearly visible in all directions, shall be located on each pump island. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related matters, Ch. 5; fire prevention, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 9.5-21. - Generally. 
In addition to design standards set forth in the city building code and city fire code, all gasoline service stations shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-21.1. - Fire-resistant materials. 
Gasoline service stations including canopies and supports over pumps, shall be of a noncombustible, fire-resistive construction in accordance with the standards of the city fire code. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-22. - Floor level. 
The floor level of all service station buildings shall be above grade with respect to any gasoline dispensing devices so as to prevent the flow of liquids or vapors into the building. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-23. - Floor surfaces. 
Floor surfaces shall be of noncombustible, nonabsorbent material. Driveways, service areas and parking areas may be surfaced with asphaltic pavement or Portland cement binder. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-24. - Floor drains. 
Floors shall drain to approved oil or gasoline separators or traps discharging to sewers installed in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-25. - Ventilation and light. 
Windows shall have glazed openings of clear glass of an area not less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the total floor area. Exhaust ventilation shall be provided, sufficient to produce four (4) air changes per hour unless the building is supplied with unobstructed openings to the outer air which is sufficient to provide the necessary ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-26. - Heating systems. 
Heating systems in service stations that have rooms or stalls for greasing or servicing motor vehicles shall be of a type that will preclude the likelihood of gasoline gas reaching the heaters. Electric heating units and equipment located within the possible path of vapor travel shall be designed and installed so as not to create an ignition hazard and shall conform with the city electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-27. - Basements and pits. 
Service station buildings shall not contain basements, excavations, or rooms below grade. Pits in service areas shall comply with the requirements of the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-28. - Restrooms. 
Restroom facilities shall be located either in the service station building or conveniently in an adjacent building. Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex and all restroom entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-29. - Slope. 
The ground shall slope downhill from all buildings on the premises to the pumps and downhill from the pumps to the street(s). 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
ARTICLE IV. - FUEL STORAGE TANKS 

Sec. 9.5-30. - Underground storage. 
Flammable and combustible liquids used or intended to be used as motor vehicle fuel shall be stored in underground tanks. The combined capacity of storage tanks shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) gallons. Any underground tank for receiving crank case drainage need not be counted in computing the storage capacity. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-31. - Location and clearance. 
(a)  To basement and the like: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two thousand (2,000) gallons shall be buried so that tops of tanks shall be lower than all floors, basements, cellars or pits of buildings within ten (10) feet thereto, on or off the property, or tanks shall maintain a clearance of ten (10) feet thereto. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons and up to six thousand (6,000) gallons, this distance shall be twenty (20) feet. For individual tanks with a capacity of more than six thousand (6,000) and up to twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  To sewer and the like: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two thousand (2,000) gallons shall be buried so that the tops of tanks shall be lower than the bottom level of all sewers, manholes, catch basins, cesspools, septic tanks, wells or cisterns within ten (10) feet on or off the property or tanks shall maintain a full clearance of ten (10) feet thereto. For individual tanks with a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons and up to six thousand (6,000) gallons, this distance shall be twenty (20) feet. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than six thousand (6,000) gallons and up to twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, this distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet. The term "sewer" includes sewer line out of station building. Provided, however, that these clearances shall not be required to a sewer line out of service station if such sewer line is constructed throughout of cast iron with leaded joints. 
(c)  To property lines: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two thousand (2,000) gallons maintain a ten-foot clearance to property lines. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons and up to six thousand (6,000) gallons, this distance shall be twenty (20) feet. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than six thousand (6,000) and up to twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, this distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Provided, however, that these clearances on the side adjacent to a public street, alley or highway may be waived by consent of the authorities having immediate jurisdiction over the public street, alley or highway, if it can be shown that the required sewer clearances can be maintained. 
(d)  To special classes of property: Tanks and pumps shall maintain a clearance of not less than six hundred (600) feet to any schoolhouse, hospital or church. The distance shall be measured from the nearest points of tanks and pumps to the nearest points of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-32. - Material and construction. 
All underground storage tanks shall be thoroughly coated on the outside with tar, asphaltum, fiberglass, or other suitable rust-resisting material, but always in accordance with all applicable law. All underground storage tanks shall be approved by either Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., American Petroleum Institute, American Society of Mechanical Engineers or State of Georgia. Periodic tests of underground storage tanks shall be conducted as required by the local fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-33. - Setting and protection. 
Underground storage tanks shall be set on a firm foundation and surrounded with at least six (6) inches of noncorrosive inert material such as clean sand or gravel. It shall then be covered with a minimum of five (5) feet of earth on top of which shall be placed a slab of reinforced concrete not less than six (6) inches thick. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-34. - Venting. 
Each tank shall be provided with a vent pipe, connected with the top of the tank and carried up to the outer air. Pipe shall be arranged for proper drainage to storage tank and its lower end shall not extend through top of tank for a distance of more than one (1) inch; it shall have no traps or pockets. 
(1)  Upper end of pipe shall be provided with a gooseneck or "T" attachment or hood. 
(2)  Vent pipe shall be of sufficient cross-sectional area to permit escape of air and gas during the filling operation and in no case less than one (1) inch in diameter. If a power pump is used in filling storage tank, and a tight connection is made to fill pipe, the vent pipe shall not be smaller than the fill pipe. 
(3)  Vent pipe shall terminate outside of building not less than twelve (12) feet above top of the fill pipe, and not less than four (4) feet, measuring vertically and horizontally, from any window or other building opening, and not less than fifteen (15) feet measured horizontally from any opening into the basement, cellar or pit of any building, and in a location which will not permit pocketing of gas. If a tight connection is made in the filling line, the terminus of vent pipe shall be carried to a point one foot above the level of the highest reservoir from which tank may be filled. 
(4)  Vent pipe from two (2) or more tanks of the same class of liquid may be connected to one upright or main header; area of header shall equal the combined area of the pipes connected to it. Connection of the header shall be not less than one foot above the level of the top of the highest reservoir from which tank may be filled. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-35. - Fill pipes. 
Fill pipes shall be carried to a location outside of any building, as remote as possible from any doorway or other opening into any building and in no case closer than ten (10) feet from any such opening. 
(1)  Location shall be in a place where there is a minimum danger of breakage from trucks or other vehicles. 
(2)  Each fill pipe shall be closed by a screw cap or other tight-fitting cap of a type which can be locked. Cap should be locked at all times when filling or gauging process is not going on. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-36. - Unloading operations. 
Unloading hose from tank truck into underground tank shall be metallic lined or its equivalent and shall be equipped with a nonferrous nozzle or tight connection metal nipple. 
(1)  During unloading operation, a competent person shall be present and in charge at all times. 
(2)  If underground tank is supplied through permanent pipe connection to an aboveground general storage tank, filling process may be by owner driven pump or gravity. In addition to valves at aboveground tanks, a valve shall be installed within control of service station personnel. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-37. - Discontinued use. 
Underground tanks which develop leaks or which are permanently discontinued in service shall be removed promptly or shall be filled with sand. The sand is to be flushed in with water until a complete sand fill is secured. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Secs. 9.5-38, 9.5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISPENSING DEVICES 

Sec. 9.5-40. - Pump island location. 
Pump island(s) shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any right-of-way or property line and a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any building on the lot, and shall be above grade with respect to any street adjoining the property. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-41. - Pump island platform. 
All pumps must be securely anchored on a concrete base of a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-42. - Approval of equipment. 
Pumps, electrical equipment, piping systems, base, nozzles and other integral parts of the dispensing device shall be approved in accordance with the standards of the National Fire Protection Association. Wiring of electric pumps and all electrical equipment in connection therewith shall conform to the National Electric Code. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-43. - Pumps. 
Motor vehicle fuel shall be transferred from underground tanks by means of fixed pumps, so designed and equipped as to allow control of the flow and to prevent leakage or accidental discharge. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-44. - Nozzles. 
An automatic nozzle with a latch-open device may be used by a competent attendant to dispense motor vehicle fuel. Such nozzle shall have the latch-open device as an integral part of the assembly and shall shut off the liquid when the gasoline tank is filled. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-45. - Controls. 
Dispensers shall be equipped with remote master control devices to shut off all pumps in the event of fire or other emergency. Signs identifying the pump shut off controls shall be labeled "Emergency Pump Shutoff." One such emergency pump shutoff shall be located within the service station building. One such emergency pump shutoff shall be located outside the building within twenty-five (25) feet of the pumps it controls. One such emergency pump shutoff shall be located outside the building at least fifty (50) feet from the pumps it controls. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-46. - Indicators. 
(a)  Price per gallon: Every dispensing device shall be equipped with a price per gallon, half-gallon or liter indicator. 
(b)  Total price indicator: Every dispensing device shall be equipped with an indicator which shall record the total price computed on the basis of the posted price and number of gallons, half-gallons or liters delivered. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Secs. 9.5-47—9.5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION 

Sec. 9.5-50. - Flammable liquids. 
No gasoline, naphtha or other higher flammable liquids shall be kept inside of service station building. No alcohol or other flammable antifreeze solution shall be kept inside service station except in original sealed containers. No transfer of such liquids from these receptacles shall be made inside the service station. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-51. - Storage and display of merchandise. 
The storage of merchandise for sale shall be confined to the rear half of the lot measured from all street frontages. The merchandise shall be stored in portable or semi-portable cabinets, provided each cabinet shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and forty (40) feet in base area, and is located not less than fifty (50) feet from all street property lines. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-52. - Automotive merchandise. 
The display of automotive merchandise for sale shall be permitted in enclosed buildings, on pump islands and within three (3) feet of the station building. No more than one (1) display rack for each type of item is permitted at each pump island. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-53. - Fire-fighting equipment. 
Each service station shall be equipped with at least one (1) foam-type fire extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline fires, of a minimum 10-B:C rating for every two (2) dispensing devices, located within twenty-five (25) feet of any dispensing device. In addition, each service station shall be equipped with at least one (1) such fire extinguisher located outside of any building, at a distance at least fifty (50) feet away from any dispensing device. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-54. - Telephone. 
Each service station shall be equipped with a telephone, and the telephone number of the local fire department shall be prominently displayed nearby. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-55. - Hours of operation. 
No service station shall operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-56. - Insurance. 
Any person, firm or corporation operating any gasoline service station shall have in effect at all times a liability insurance policy, protecting each person who may be injured therein, in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-57. - Attendants. 
Every service station shall have at least one (1) competent attendant on duty during all hours of its operation. The station operator shall be responsible for instructing attendants as the fire code provisions for the dispensing of motor vehicle fuels and for the operation of dispensing devices, fire extinguishers and public address systems to the satisfaction of the local fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-58. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  Cleaning with gasoline, naphtha or other highly flammable liquids shall not be permitted in or around service station. 
(b)  The fuel tank of no motor vehicle shall be serviced until the motor and ignition has been shut off. 
(c)  No smoking shall be permitted on premises at any time, and the signage requirements of this chapter in connection therewith shall be strictly complied with. 
(d)  No open lights or flames shall be permitted on the premises. 
(e)  Premises must be kept neat and clean, free from rubbish and trash. 
(f)  Motor vehicle fuel shall be dispensed only into the fuel tank of motor vehicles, provided, however, that individual sales of up to five (5) gallons may be made in closed, portable, metal containers, painted red and properly labeled and approved by either Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., American Petroleum Institute, or American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Secs. 9.5-59—9.5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING PUMPS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 132, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1986, amended the code by adding a new Art. VIII to Ch. 9.5. Inasmuch as the provisions of former Art. VII have been redesignated as § 9.5-6, the provisions of the aforesaid ordinance have been included herein as Art. VII. 

Sec. 9.5-70. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any gasoline service station, convenience store, or other business, where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, where the public is permitted and expected to operate the pump to put fuel into the tank of a vehicle. This article is hereby expressly declared not to apply to motor fuel dispensing units which are not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-71. - Permit. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, operate or maintain a motor fuel dispensing station with self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps shall apply for and obtain a permit in the manner set forth in article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-72. - Regulations. 
All regulations pertaining to automobile service stations, as defined in articles I through VI of this chapter shall apply to self-service gasoline stations, except as specifically otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-73. - Dispensing fuel. 
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall dispense fuel at a self-service gas station. No person who is under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of a controlled substance shall dispense fuel at a self-service gas station. All persons dispensing fuel shall use care and caution to prevent spillage and to prevent fire hazards. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no provision of any ordinance shall be applied to prevent any member of the public, not an employee of an automobile service station, from dispensing fuel into the fuel tank of a vehicle in which he is a passenger or of which he is a driver. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-74. - Attendants. 
At any service station having self-service motor vehicle pumps, at least one attendant shall be on duty during all hours of operation. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity to be able to provide assistance to patrons of such self-service pumps, if needed or desired. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-75. - Visibility. 
At each service station or other business providing gasoline to customers at self-service pumps, the attendant shall be stationed so that all persons dispensing gasoline are clearly visible to such attendant at all times. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-76. - Cut-of devices. 
At each gasoline service station or other business providing gasoline to customers at self-service pumps, the owner, lessee, or person operating said station shall install a device inside the primary building within ten (10) feet of the main cash register to enable the attendant to cut the self-service pumps on and off. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-77. - Dispensing nozzles. 
Gasoline dispensing nozzles to be used at self-service pumps shall be an automatic-closing type without a latch-open device, and shall shut off the liquid when the gasoline tank is filled. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-78. - Special dispensing systems. 
Special dispensing systems, such as a coin-operated and remote, set types, are permitted at self-service pumps, provided that an attendant is on duty at the pump islands during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-79. - Type-of-service signs. 
A sign, in block letters at least four (4) inches in height, and visible in all directions, shall be conspicuously posted on each pump island, indicating whether the island is self-service or full-service. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-80. - Instructional signs. 
A sign shall be posted on every self-service dispensing device, in block letters at least one-half inch in height, giving complete instructions as to the use of self-service devices in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-81. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in the mayor's court of Clarkston shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable individually. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Sec. 9.5-82. - Rights to prohibit preserved. 
This article is not intended to create private rights, and the governing authority of the city may review and revoke its prior determinations regarding the licensing of self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, and may at any time, if deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, or welfare of its inhabitants, prohibit the maintenance or operation of such pumps within the city's corporate limits. In the event such prohibition is instituted, current licenses shall be allowed to expire at their previously set dates, but renewal shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 11-4-86) 
Chapter 10 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 274, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, amended former Ch. 10, Arts. I, II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject material and derived from the Code of 1968 and following: 

 

 
Charter reference— Health and sanitation powers, § 1.03(l) 

ARTICLE I. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 10-1. - Nuisances defined. 
The following conditions are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Toilets, plumbing, sewers, septic tank systems, garbage containers or any other sanitary systems in bad repair. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, fruit, vegetable, animal, or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept, used, or placed or disposed of in such a manner or place as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. 
(5)  Sewage, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes or any other wastes deposited upon or allowed to remain upon the ground surface or any other place so as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. 
(6)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(7)  The disposal of any material, refuse, or filth in any manner that does not comply with article II of this Code. 
(8)  The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise, or any noise that is of the intensity or duration as would be detrimental to the public peace or welfare, as set forth in article III of this Code. 
(9)  The keeping of any swimming pool that does not comply with the provisions set forth in article IV of this Code. 
(10)  To keep in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other like container, unless the doors, latches, and locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(12)  Violation of the DeKalb County Ord. No. 93-32, adopted by the county on November 10, 1992, known as the "DeKalb Clean Air Ordinance," which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(13)  Any other nuisance that as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(14)  Any property or structure that by virtue of its overall condition is disorderly or in violation of other ordinances of the city and which would tend to constitute a breech of standards adhered to by other properties or structures in its neighborhood or immediate area. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Violations. 
No person shall create, maintain, support, aid, or continue any condition that constitutes a nuisance as defined herein. 
(1)  If the owner or occupier of any such property where a nuisance shall be found fails to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after having been notified by certified mail in writing by the city manager or his designee, such failure on the part of the owner or occupier of the property shall constitute a violation of this section; provided however, that upon the fourth occurrence of a violation upon the same property within any twelve- month period, the ten-day grace period to abate the nuisance shall not apply and the violating party shall be subject to immediate citation for such offense. 
(2)  If the owner or occupier of such property fails to abate a nuisance after being notified as hereinbefore described, the city is authorized to enter upon such premises and clean, abate, or remove the nuisance where appropriate, which shall be done at the expense of the owner or occupier of said property. 
(3)  If any nuisance exists on any premises which creates an imminent threat of harm to the safety or well-being of others, the city is authorized to enter upon such premises and clean and remove the nuisance without providing notice to the owner or occupier of said property, which shall be done at the expense of the owner or occupier of said property. 
(4)  Any person, firm, or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in the mayor's court shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 287, §§ 1, 2, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 376, § 8, 12-3-13 ) 
Secs. 10-3—10-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORT, DISPOSAL, AND STORAGE OF WASTE, TRASH, JUNK, AND OTHER MATERIAL 

Sec. 10-10. - Transport. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport for any distance, any dirt, soil, sand, rubbish, or other material, over or upon or in the streets of the city, in any wagon, cart, wheelbarrow, truck, or other vehicle from which dirt, soil, sand, rubbish, or any like substance escapes or leaks. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 10-11. - Disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit offal or dead animals at any public place within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any slops, garbage, or filth of any kind into or onto any street, or any other public place, or any private place without the consent of the owner. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any gutter or spout so as to convey filth from kitchens or elsewhere into any street of the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks, or gutters as a means of drainage to carry off any used and dirty water or other filthy fluids. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, fluid or liquid substance so as to injuriously affect the surface of any street or sidewalk so as to make it unsafe for travel. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to allow waste water from washing cars or from other sources to run across the sidewalk, and such person shall provide an adequate means of disposal thereof. Operators of filling stations shall not wash their premises between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 10-12. - Cleanliness of sidewalks. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, litter shall be defined as all waste materials including, but not limited to, bottles, glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, paper, plastic, rubber, garbage, offal, waste building material at construction sites, disposable packages or containers thrown or deposited as prohibited herein. 
(b)  Each owner, agent, occupant, or lessee whose property faces on sidewalks, or strips between street and sidewalk, shall be responsible for keeping said sidewalk and strips free of litter. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, occupants are required to remove all accumulated snow or ice from sidewalks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks into the streets. Such litter shall be deposited in a proper receptacle which shall be covered to prevent scattering by wind and animal. 
(d)  Duty of merchants and landowners. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each proprietor and each operator of any business, industry, or institution to keep the adjacent and surrounding area clear and free of litter. These areas include, but are not limited to, public and private sidewalks, parking lots, roads, alleys, grounds, loading and unloading areas, and all vacant lots which are owned by said establishment or institution. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each residential property owner and tenant to keep all exterior private property free from litter. These areas shall include, but not be restricted to, sidewalks, alleys, driveways, yards, grounds, fences, walls, property lines, drainage areas, and vacant lots in residential areas. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The director of public works, the code enforcement officer, and the duly sworn police officers of the city are hereby empowered to issue citations to, or to arrest, persons violating the provisions of this section, and may serve and execute all warrants, and other process, issued by the court in enforcing the provisions of said section. In addition, mailing by certified mail of such process to his last known place of residence shall be deemed as personal service upon the person charged. 
(2)  Whenever any person is arrested for a violation of this section, the arresting officer shall take the name and address of such person and issue a complaint, summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place specified in such complaint or notice. Said offenses shall be tried in the mayor=s court and shall be subject to the fines and/or imprisonment upon conviction as set forth in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 287, § 3, 12-7-04) 
Sec. 10-13. - Animal waste in common areas of multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow waste from such animal to be deposited or remain on the ground of any common area of a multifamily dwelling. Any such waste shall be cleaned up and removed by the owner or custodian of such animal. 
(b)  In the event that the owner or custodian of any animal cannot be identified, the management of any multifamily dwelling where animal waste is found in a common area shall be responsible for the removal of such waste and shall keep common areas free and clear of all animal waste. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 1, 6-6-06) 
Secs. 10-14—10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 10-20. - Noise violations. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this Code, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Blowing horns or signaling devices. The sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of a radio, phonograph, or any other musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of city residents and visitors. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. on streets. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on public streets particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle, or other vehicle that creates frequent and continued noise for any reason, including being out of repair or being loaded with heavy equipment. 
(6)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Building operations; excavation of streets; permit required. 
a.  The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, and the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent and necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while the emergency continues. 
b.  If the city manager or his designee should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, such official may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(9)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers. 
(10)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale or display of merchandise, and loudspeakers or amplifiers on automobiles, trucks, buses, or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 376, § 9, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 10-21. - Same—Exceptions. 
Exceptions. The prohibited conduct set forth in section 10-6 of this chapter shall not apply in the following situations: 
(1)  Any vehicles of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by on or behalf of the city or the state, at night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Secs. 10-22—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 10-30. - Grills over outlets required. 
(a)  Every person operating a swimming pool in the city, where such pools are emptied through drains, is required to have a suitable grill over all outlets. 
(b)  Such grill shall be approved by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 10-31. - When swimming is prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to go into a swimming pool at any time when it is being drained. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 10-32. - Purification of water (swimming pools). 
All owners or operators of swimming pools within the city shall be required to use a chlorinator or other such method as may be approved by the DeKalb County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 376, § 10, 12-3-13 ) 
Secs. 10-33—10-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 10-40. - Adoption of the Dekalb County Animal Code. 
The DeKalb County Animal Code, sections 5-1—5-20 of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia, is hereby adopted as the animal control regulations of the city, with like effect as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 10-41. - Violations. 
The city reserves the right to punish any person convicted of a violation of the DeKalb County Animal Code as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Secs. 10-42—10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCRAP TIRES 

Sec. 10-50. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Clarkston City Council finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, safety, welfare and economic progress of the city and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to develop regulations and procedures that govern scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined those words shall have their common meaning. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Code enforcement officer means an officer of the city police department or other designee authorized by the chief of police to write official warnings and citations to insure compliance with the City Code. 
Manifest means a document used to identify the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, hereinafter referred to as EPD. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires. 
Recycle means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retreadable casing means a tire suitable for retreading. 
Reused tire means a tire used for purposes, approved by the EPD, other than intended, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, and erosion control. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end use, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages and service stations. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements) and includes processing by: shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive tires from scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or the general public for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33) as may hereafter be amended. 
Tire means a continuous, solid or pneumatic covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle that is not permanently attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire handling business means any person that derives fifteen (15) percent or more of its gross income from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: individual, leasing and private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleets and government agencies. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two-thirty-secondths ( 2/32 ) foot of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, and the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the county that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-52. - Dumping of scrap tires prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to dump scrap tires or cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the City of Clarkston including the following: 
(1)  Any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; and 
(2)  Any river, canal, stream, creek, or fresh water lake; and 
(3)  Any public property or private property not owned or maintained by the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-53. - Scrap tire storage, handling, and disposal. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that will not adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of property to store all scrap tires in a manner that is consistent with federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-54. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No person may store more than one hundred (100) scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any person storing in excess of one hundred (100) scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this part. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A tire retailer with not more than three thousand (3,000) scrap tires in storage; 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type that the retreader is actively retreading. 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than five hundred (500) scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the division so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do no exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store scrap tires except in a container, located outside of an authorized business, enclosed on all four (4) sides by a solid screen and having a secure top cover to prevent the accumulation of water in the container. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-55. - Compliance. 
(a)  Scrap tire generator. Any person who generates scrap tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by EPD and shall maintain copies of manifests for any scrap tires that have been shipped or removed from the business location within the past thirty-six (36) months. Separate identification numbers are required for each generator having multiple generation locations. 
(1)  The manifests shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and identification number of the generator; 
b.  Number and total tonnage (accurate to within ten (10) percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; 
e.  Destination of scrap tires; and 
f.  Signatures of the scrap tire generator, scrap tire carrier and scrap tire processor. 
(2)  The completed manifest(s) and the scrap tire generator identification number shall be made available to the environmental code enforcement officer upon request. 
(3)  Scrap tire generator identification numbers are not transferable; and each generator shall insure that the scrap tire section of the EPD approves the carrier being used to transport scrap tires. 
(b)  Scrap tire carrier. It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator within thirty (30) days from the date on which the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires. The date the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)  Tire handling businesses. All tire handling businesses shall maintain an accurate inventory of all new and used tires received at the place of business, sold to a consumer, sent to another tire handling business, or shipped to an approved processor. Inventory and quarterly transport reports shall be kept on site and made available for inspection by code enforcement officers. Quarterly reports shall be sent to the City of Clarkston director of public works and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of company that transported tires; 
(2)  Name of owner of company and driver of transport vehicle; 
(3)  Telephone number of transport company; 
(4)  Valid environmental protection division scrap tire program transportation identification number; 
(5)  Type of vehicle used to transport tires. 
(e)  Quarterly reports. Quarterly tire transport reports reflecting tire handling activity for the prior three-month period shall be mailed to the address below not later than the first day of January, April, July and October of each year: 
City of Clarkston Director of Public Works  3921 Church Street  Clarkston, Georgia 30021 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-56. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the chief of police and director of public works or their designees. 
(b)  The code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article on behalf of the City of Clarkston, and shall be empowered to enter private property, with the owner's consent, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violation of this article. If the owner does not consent to such entry on private property for inspection, such officer shall obtain a warrant to enter upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Sec. 10-57. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imposition of a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or up to thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both. Upon conviction, the court may also order the convicted person to remove any scrap tires that have been accumulated in violation of this article from the property. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 2(Attach.), 11-4-09) 
Secs. 10-58, 10-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 10-60. - Findings and intent. 
The City of Clarkston finds and declares that the purposes of this article are (1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and (2) to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smokefree air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Electronic smoking device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Hookah means a water pipe and any associated products and devices which are used to produce fumes, smoke, and/or vapor from the burning of material including, but not limited to, tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, construction sites, temporary offices, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Playground means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds or on city or county grounds. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Public event means an event which is open to and may be attended by the general public, including but not limited to, concerts, fairs, farmers' markets, festivals, parades, performances, and other exhibitions, regardless of any fee or age requirement. 
Public place means an area to which the public is invited or permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gambling facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, parking structures, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Recreational area means any public or private area open to the public for recreational purposes, whether or not any fee for admission is charged, including but not limited to, amusement parks, athletic fields, beaches, fairgrounds, gardens, golf courses, parks, plazas, skate parks, swimming pools, trails, and zoos. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, private and public school cafeterias, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed or unenclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this article. 
Sports arena means a place where people assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling alleys. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-62. - City facilities and property. 
All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Clarkston, as well as all outdoor property adjacent to such buildings and under the control of the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-63. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City of Clarkston, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(a)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(b)  Areas available to the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments. 
(c)  Bars. 
(d)  Bingo facilities. 
(e)  Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(f)  Convention facilities. 
(g)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(h)  Elevators. 
(i)  Health care facilities. 
(j)  Hotels and motels. 
(k)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(l)  Parking structures. 
(m)  Polling places. 
(n)  Public transportation vehicles, including buses and vehicles for hire, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities. 
(o)  Restaurants. 
(p)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(q)  Retail stores. 
(r)  Service lines. 
(s)  Shopping malls. 
(t)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(u)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-64. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment without exception. This includes, without limitation, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this Article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-65. - Prohibition of smoking in certain enclosed residential facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities: 
(1)  All private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes. 
(2)  All hotel and motel guest rooms. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-66. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(a)  Within thirty (30) feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to prevent tobacco smoke from entering those areas. 
(b)  On all outdoor property that is adjacent to buildings owned, leased, or operated by the City of Clarkston. 
(c)  In, and within thirty (30) feet of, outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants. 
(d)  In outdoor shopping malls, including parking structures. 
(e)  In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and within 30 feet of, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(f)  In outdoor recreational areas, including parking lots. 
(g)  In, and within thirty (30) feet of, all outdoor playgrounds. 
(h)  In, and within thirty (30) feet of, all outdoor public events. 
(i)  In, and within thirty (30) feet of, all outdoor public transportation stations, platforms, and shelters. 
(j)  In all outdoor service lines, including lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, such as service that is provided by bank tellers, parking lot attendants, and toll takers. In lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, smoking is prohibited by both pedestrians and persons in vehicles, but only within 30 feet of the point of service. 
(k)  In outdoor common areas of apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities, except in designated smoking areas, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total outdoor common area, which must be located at least thirty (30) feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-67. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all outdoor places of employment where two or more employees are required to be in the course of their employment. This includes, without limitation, work areas, construction sites, temporary offices such as trailers, restroom facilities, and vehicles. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-68. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, smoking shall be allowed in private residences, unless used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-69. - Temporary grandfathering of certain establishments. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, smoking shall be permitted until December 31, 2020, in the following places: 
(a)  "Qualified adult entertainment establishments" recognized pursuant to City Code section 2.5-31; and 
(b)  Businesses that meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The business was operating at its current location pursuant to a valid business license issued by the City of Clarkston on April 1, 2016; 
(2)  The business is licensed and operated as: 
a.  A shop engaged in the retail sale of tobacco, other plant product used for smoking, accessories used for smoking, Electronic Smoking Devices, or substances intended to be inhaled through electronic smoking devices, or 
b.  A restaurant; and 
(3)  No person under twenty-one (21) years old is permitted inside the business at any time. 
With respect to the foregoing subsection (b) for retail smoke shops and restaurants, failure to maintain all of the required conditions in place at all times will result in the permanent revocation of grandfathered status of the business, upon notice to the business, due process, and a determination by the city council at a regular meeting that the business has failed to maintain compliance with this section. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 11-1-16 ; Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 4-3-18) 
Sec. 10-70. - Declaration of establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of section 10-71 is posted. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-71. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays where smoking prohibited. 
The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a place of employment, public place, or residential facility where smoking is prohibited by this article shall: 
(a)  Clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) in that place. 
(b)  Clearly and conspicuously post at every entrance to that place a sign stating that smoking is prohibited or, in the case of outdoor places, clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs in appropriate locations as determined by the City Manager or an authorized designee. 
(c)  Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this article at least one sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(d)  Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-72. - Warning sign to be posted in businesses where nicotine products sold 
(a)  Any person owning or operating a place of business in which cigarettes, tobacco products, tobacco related objects, or electronic smoking devices are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place a sign which shall contain the following statement: 
"SALE OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR TOBACCO RELATED OBJECTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS, VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW." 
Such sign shall be printed in letters of at least one-half inch in height. 
(b)  Every person owning or operating a business described in subsection (a) of this section shall also post a sign containing the same statement in the six most common languages used in Clarkston other than English. Such sign shall be obtained from City Hall by such person. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-73. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, customer, or resident of a multiple-unit residential facility because that employee, applicant, customer, or resident exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. Notwithstanding section 10-75, violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-74. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the police department, the quality of life officer, the city manager or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Clarkston. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city manager. 
(d)  The quality of life officer shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an area regulated by this article shall direct a person who is smoking in violation of this article to extinguish or turn off the product being smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-75. - Violations and penalties 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 10-73(a), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-76. - Public education. 
The city manager shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-77. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-78. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
( Ord. No. 398, § 1(Attach.), 8-4-16 ) 
Sec. 10-79. - Hookah license for restaurants. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, restaurants licensed to operate within the city may apply for and the city manager may issue a permit that will allow limited smoking of hookah within the restaurant. Such application must be submitted no later than July 2S 2018. No new license under this section will be issued unless the application is received by such date. 
(b)  A hookah permit issued by the city manager pursuant to this section grants an annual privilege to the permittee. Such permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Such permits may be renewed but the permittee shall have no right to nor expectation of renewal for any subsequent year. 
(c)  An annual regulatory permit fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of a hookah permit. Such fee is intended to compensate the city for the cost of enforcing this section. The annual fee will be pro-rated for year 2018 but will not be pro-rated during any subsequent year. 
(d)  The following regulations will be strictly enforced at restaurants holding a hookah license: 
(1)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years old is permitted inside the establishment at any time. 
(2)  No smoking of any type is permitted before 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  After 9:00 p.m., only smoking of hookah is permitted; all other smoking remains prohibited. 
(4)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years old is permitted inside the establishment after 9:00 p.m. 
(e)  If the owner or operator of a restaurant holding a hookah permit is convicted of any violation of this article in municipal court, the hookah permit for that establishment shall be automatically revoked. No refund will be issued for the permit fee. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 2, 4-3-18) 
Chapter 10.5 - MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 10.5-1. - Permit required. 
No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence for producing, taking or making any motion picture, television production or photographic production without first applying for and receiving a city filming permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-2. - Exceptions. 
Regulation by this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Amateur photographers. 
(2)  Reporters or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio or television broadcasting station engaged in on the spot broadcasting, reporting or photographing of news of general public interest. This exception is not to include magazine or documentary programs. 
(3)  Productions which are conducted by the City of Clarkston or any city board or commission. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 2, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-3. - Permit administrator. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed as the permit administrator and shall issue permits as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 3, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-4. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make application on the approved form provided by the City of Clarkston. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements and insurance certificates required by this chapter before any permit will be approved. 
(b)  Filming permit applications shall be submitted at least five (5) working days prior to the first date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 4, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-5. - Issuance of permit; conditions; appeals. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movements or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Applicant shall make any street closure requests in writing to the city clerk at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the desired closure date. 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
(3)  Such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all safety precautions will be taken as determined by the city clerk. 
(b)  The decision of the city clerk to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five (5) working days of the decision to the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall render a decision on the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. The decision of the city council will be final. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 5, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-6. - Bond, insurance, hold harmless and indemnification. 
(a)  As a condition of issuing such a permit, the applicant shall furnish a bond, insurance or both in an amount to be determined by the city clerk, but not less than five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) dollars, to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittee's activities. 
(b)  A minimum of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) of such bond, general liability insurance coverage or both shall be required in the event aircraft, helicopters, pyrotechnics or automobile chase scenes are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form mandated by this chapter. 
(c)  The applicant shall execute an indemnity and hold harmless agreement as provided by the City of Clarkston prior to the issuance of any permit that shall hold the city harmless against any claims, liability or judgments arising out of the permittee's activities. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 6, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-7. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The city clerk shall have the authority, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored, including the timely payment of all required fees and deposits, or suspend or revoke any permit where the public safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity. Provided, however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, the city clerk shall have the authority to suspend a permit pending a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 7, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-8. - Fees and costs of additional services. 
Each application shall be accompanied by the following non-refundable fees: 
(1)  A process fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) will be submitted to the City of Clarkston at the time of application. 
(2)  Upon approval of an application for a city filming permit, the city clerk shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing police, public works and other city employees and services for public safety for the production. The cost of such services shall be borne by the applicant and shall be paid to the city prior to the conducting of a production. The amount of such fees shall be based on the city's actual cost of providing the required number of police and other city employees and services necessary to ensure the safety of both the participants of the production and the community. 
(3)  If the actual cost of public services for the production is less than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the permittee shall promptly be refunded the difference by the city. If the actual cost for public services is more than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the difference shall become due and payable to the city upon the permittee's receipt of a statement of actual costs by the city. 
(4)  All fees may be waived for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly. Charitable and non-profit organizations must qualify under Section 501 (C)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and proof of such status must be provided to the City of Clarkston in order for said fees to be waived by the city. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 8, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-9. - Regulations and conditions. 
(a)  The permittee shall: 
(1)  Maintain a copy of the production permit on-site at all times. 
(2)  Comply with any and all conditions or restrictions to the City of Clarkston may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes to the conditions or restrictions shall be made without the written approval of the city clerk. 
(3)  Have nonexclusive use of facilities and public right-of-way unless otherwise granted in writing. 
(4)  Provide advanced notification of forty-eight (48) hours in a form approved by the city clerk to adjacent properties for any production. 
(5)  Comply with the City of Clarkston Noise Ordinance. 
(b)  The city clerk may promulgate and enforce additional regulations as necessary and appropriate in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 9, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-10. - Filming on private property. 
(a)  A permittee is required to obtain the property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. Written permission of the property owner must be presented at time of permit application. 
(b)  A permittee is required to minimize interference with the normal activities of a neighborhood or commercial area, including access to private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 10, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-11. - Filming at city facilities or on the public right-of-way. 
In the event that the applicant desires to locate their production event at a facility owned or managed by the City of Clarkston, or on the public right-of-way, the city shall charge a daily fee in an amount determined by the city clerk not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. If an existing facility charge has been established by the city at a facility owned or managed by the city, that fee will be charged to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 11, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-12. - Traffic control. 
The City of Clarkston retains the right and the authority to regulate traffic and require vehicles to be moved or towed (at the owners expense) to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 12, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-13. - Faithful performance bond; clean-up and restoration. 
To ensure clean-up and restoration of any site on public property or public right-of-way used by permittee within the city limits, said permittee may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond, in an amount to be determined by the city clerk, at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of the production and upon the finding by the City of Clarkston that the site has been satisfactorily cleaned up and restored, the bond may be returned to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 13, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 10.5-14. - Enforcement. 
A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for up to six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 342, § 14, 2-2-10) 
Chapter 11 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND TAXES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage licenses, §§ 3-20 et seq.; 3-60 et seq.; business-related offenses, § 12-31 et seq.; street sales and displays, §§ 16-4—16-4.2. 
State Law reference— Specific, business, and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2016 , repealed former Art. I, §§ 11-1—11-17, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following: 

 

 

Sec. 11-1. - Registration of the name of a business. 
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be engaged in, prosecute or carry on any business, trade or profession, either in whole or in part within the corporate limits of the city by maintaining an office or other place of business within the limits of said city, or by soliciting orders through said office or business, or engage in any business in any manner through said office without having registered said business with the city clerk, having paid the occupational tax as provided in article II of this chapter, if applicable, and complied with all other provisions of this Code which regulate businesses within the city, and have obtained an occupational tax/business license from the clerk. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-2. - Responsible persons construed. 
Whenever in this chapter the term "owner" or "person" is used, the principal, but in his, her or their absence any agent, clerk, or employee, shall be subject to the penalties herein imposed should the said business be carried on without registering the business as required herein in the same manner as if he or she was, or they were the proprietor or proprietors of said business. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-3. - Administration of this article. 
The city manager, or designee shall administer and enforce, the provisions of this article requiring registration and licensing of all persons doing business in the city. The city planner or the planning and zoning board shall make recommendation to the city clerk where required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-4. - Application procedure. 
(a)  New business. Prior to commencing a new business in the city, the owner shall file on forms provided by the city clerk an application to do business in the city. The application shall be signed by the owner, a partner, or corporate officer and attested before a notary public. Application shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk and shall provide at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address within the city, and local telephone number of the entity which owns the business; 
(2)  An exact description of the nature of the business including a description of the items to be sold, the service to be rendered, and the business activities expected to be conducted on the premises; 
(3)  The federal tax identification number and any Georgia sales tax identification number held by the business; 
(4)  The expected date of opening and the expected hours of operation for the business; 
(5)  If the owner is an individual, the name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth and Social Security number of the owner; 
(6)  The name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth and Social Security number of the manager of the business; 
(7)  The name and address of the places of business or employment of the owner (if an individual) and the manager of the business for the previous five (5) years; 
(8)  The name, address and phone number of a person or persons to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(b)  Renewal. Business licenses granted pursuant to this article shall expire December 31 of each year, but a grace period shall be provided between January 1 and March 1 of the following year during which a business license may be renewed. Renewal is not a matter of right and no person or entity shall have a vested right to a license or the renewal thereof. Renewal shall be made by application to the city on forms provided by the city clerk and shall require submission of the same information as required for an initial license as described in subsection (a) of this section. If a licensee fails to apply for renewal of a business license by March 1st, such license shall automatically be deemed suspended and the licensee shall not be allowed to conduct business in the city until and unless such license is approved for renewal and all fees and penalties paid. 
(c)  Grant of license. The city manager or designee shall act upon the new business application or renewal application within thirty (30) days of receipt of a fully completed application, payment by the applicant of the occupational tax as provided in article II of this chapter and tender of the necessary fees by the applicant. An application for a new license or a renewal license shall be granted unless the city determined that grounds for denial exist for one or more of the reasons set forth in section 11-5 of this article. 
(d)  Review of applications for zoning compliance. The City of Clarkston's designated city planner or, if no such designee exists, the planning and zoning board shall review all new applications for business licenses and shall provide an opinion to the city clerk stating whether or not the city planner or planning and zoning board believes the proposed use to be consistent with the zoning designation for the subject property. This review may include the identification of site requirements for specific uses as defined by the zoning district and/or adopted city design standards. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-5. - Grounds for rejection of an application, for suspension or revocation of an existing license, or for nonrenewal of an application for a business license. 
A business license may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The application is incomplete; 
(2)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains false or misleading information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(3)  The applicant has failed to pay the occupational tax, administrative fee or regulatory fee required by article II of this chapter; 
(4)  The applicant or its employees have engaged in illegal activity either on the premises of the business or in the transaction of the applicant's business; 
(5)  The business has been operated in a manner that constitutes a nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(6)  The business is subject to regulation under some other section of this Code and has failed to conduct itself in accordance with those regulations; 
(7)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the city, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances; 
(8)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he practices or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(9)  The applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, a sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property during a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a certificate, the applicant pleads guilty, is convicted of, or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(10)  The business or establishment has been found by a court of law to have been operating unlawfully; or 
(11)  The applicant has allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation or any criminal law of the State of Georgia or the United States to occur on the premises within the city. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-6. - Suspension and revocation of a business license. 
Should the city manager or designee find cause for one or more reasons set forth in section 11-5 for a business license to be suspended or revoked, the city manager or designee shall notify the licensee by written notice of intent to suspend or revoke said license. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall state the grounds for the suspension or revocation of said business license and notify the holder of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-7. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision by the city manager or designee under this article, the following procedure shall apply: a written notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the city. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal pursuant to this section is lost. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the city manager or designee shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The notice shall specify the time, place and date, not less than ten (10) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the date the notice is issued, on which the mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall conduct a hearing on the aggrieved party's appeal. The appealing party may be represented by legal counsel. The mayor and city council or designated hearing officer, shall receive all relevant duly sworn testimony and evidence from the appellant, any witness he may wish to call, from interested parties and from the city staff. The city council or designated hearing officer may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of based upon the evidence submitted at the hearing. The action of the city council or designated hearing officer shall be final. The city council or designated hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(c)  The mayor and city council, or such hearing officer as the mayor and council may designate, shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the appellant and the city manager within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny the appeal, the decision appealed from shall become final. 
(d)  If the appeal pursuant to this section is denied, the aggrieved party may seek review from the DeKalb County Superior Court by writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who operates a business within the city without a valid occupational tax/business license, after revocation of a license or during the suspension of a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of operation of a business without a valid license shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-9. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance. 
Any business operated, conducted or maintained without having a valid occupational tax/business license issued pursuant to this chapter in effect is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, In the manner provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-10. - Background examination and good character of sellers and traders of used goods. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell or trade used goods including, but not limited to, used furniture, car title loan companies not meeting the definition of a "pawn broker" under article VII of this chapter, used appliance companies, used jewelry companies, flea markets and second hand stores shall make application to the city clerk for a license authorizing the same on the form described in section 11-4 of this article. Thereafter, if any person other than a person or person listed in the application as manager shall be employed as a manager, the name, home address, home telephone number, Social Security number, date of birth and places of employment for the previous five (5) years of the new manager or managers shall be filed with the city clerk for investigation as hereinafter provided within three (3) days of the date of such employment. 
(b)  If the entity applying for said license is a partnership, corporation, or other form of limited liability company, the application shall contain the name, home address, home telephone number, Social Security number, and date of birth of each partner, officer, director or member of the entity seeking such license. Applications must be sworn to by the applicant or any agent thereof. All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the city clerk to insure compliance with this section. Failure to furnish such information and records within fifteen (15) days from the date of such application for a license to the city clerk shall automatically serve to dismiss the application for a business license. 
(c)  The city clerk, in conjunction with the chief of police, shall investigate all applicants to insure that such person, individuals, partners in a partnership, officers and directors of any corporation, members of any other form of business entity, and the manager or managers thereof shall be of good moral character, and in no event shall any license be granted to any business in which an owner, partner, officer, director, member or manager has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, theft by taking, or theft by receiving, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(d)  The applicant shall file and provide to the chief of police fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the chief of police in order to conduct a thorough, complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the persons covered by this article. The chief of police shall report to the city clerk with regard to his findings relative to such background examination. 
(e)  The city clerk shall determine whether the applicant meets the good character requirements of this Section, when applicable, before issuance of a business license. 
(f)  The city council shall hear appeals of decisions pursuant to this section under the same procedure as set forth in section 11-7 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-11. - Public display of merchandise is prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter, or for any other person, to display outside the walls of any business location merchandise or samples of merchandise which are offered for sale at that or another business location. Notwithstanding the foregoing, objects such as automobiles which are too large to be displayed indoors and plants or other living materials which require sunlight may be displayed outdoors. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-12. - Regulation and licensing of vendors. 
(a)  Vendors are hereby defined as a provider of goods or services operating within the City of Clarkston whose principal place of business is outside of the city and who by the nature of their goods and service is mobile or transient in nature. Examples include, but are not limited to, mobile catering services, mobile auto detailing services and door-to-door sales. 
(b)  All vendors offering goods or services within the city limits of the City of Clarkston shall have on their person at all times a valid business license issued from the jurisdiction where their principal place of business is located and a City of Clarkston Vendor License. 
(c)  Application shall be made for a City of Clarkston Vendor License on forms provided by the city clerk. The fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Vendor licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issue. 
(d)  Any person that fails to comply with the requirements of this section, upon a finding of guilt, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances. Failure to comply on each day shall be a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-13. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any business within the City of Clarkston to be open to the public or to transact any business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. It shall be unlawful for any business within the City of Clarkston to be open to the public or to transact any business between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday mornings. Certain businesses may be further restricted in their hours of operation by separate city ordinance. Any owner or other responsible person operating a business in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Any business operating in violation of this section shall be subject to license suspension revocation pursuant to section 11-6 of this Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-14. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business license or registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-15. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city business license or registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license next to the city business license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep both the state license and the city license there at all times while valid. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-16. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required by state law, county ordinance, or city ordinance to obtain any health permit, bond, certificate of qualification, certificate of competency, or any other regulatory authorization shall first, before the issuance of city business license or registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-17. - Display of license or registration required. 
A city-issued business license and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Clarkston, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Clarkston, Georgia, but a business tax registration is required pursuant to Article II of this chapter, said registration shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 11-18—11-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2016 , repealed former Art. II, §§ 11-33—11-37, 11-39—11-44, 11-47—11-54, 11-56—11-64, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 352, § 3, adopted Dec. 8, 2010. 

Sec. 11-33. - Occupation tax required for business dealing in the City of Clarkston. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Clarkston, Georgia, and having a location in the city or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation in an amount to be determined as set forth in section 11-36 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-34. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the indicated definitions: 
Administrative fee means a fee which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax for a business. 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(3)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a) (1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a) (2); 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
(6)  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location of office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, shall not include a temporary Work site which serves a single customer or project. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code and it may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city at any time pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. This definition applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Such shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means payment required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-35. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable annual administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required on all business and occupational tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable, annual regulatory fee will be imposed on certain businesses as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. The regulatory fee schedule for persons practicing the following listed occupations is as follows: 

 
  
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-36. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined by the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, United States Treasury Department, or Internal Revenue Service. The finance department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability to be established pursuant to subsection (a) of this section are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. No tax will be assessed for the first $20,000.00 of gross revenue. Gross revenues above $20,000.00 are taxed using the fee class table based on profitability set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the City Manager. 

 
  
(e)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-37. - Levy of occupation tax on business with no location in Georgia. 
An occupation tax is hereby imposed, in an amount to be determined by section 11-36 of this article, on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Clarkston and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Clarkston for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customer or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Clarkston. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-38. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-39. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-40. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. section 48-13-9(c). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall pay occupation tax pursuant to this section notwithstanding any other provision of this article. 
(b)  Professionals subject to this section shall pay an occupation tax of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner tax applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, the payment of the occupational tax and the posting of the certificate as described herein shall not be a precondition to the practice of any of the professions described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). Those professionals who fail to pay the occupational tax or to post the certificate as required herein shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-41. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-42. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of law within the city. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-43. - When tax due and payable. 
Each business within the city shall pay occupation tax on an annual basis for each calendar year. Said occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 15 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-44. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business shall be exempt from occupation tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless said business provides proof to the city clerk that fifty (50) percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such charitable purpose, as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 11-45, 11-46. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-47. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
Should any business required to register and pay occupation tax pursuant to this chapter fail to do so, each officer or agent soliciting for or representing such business shall individually be subject to the various penalties provided for in this chapter for businesses that fail to obtain a registration or pay occupation tax. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-48. - Civil penalty for transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Any existing or new business that transacts business within the city without first paying the required occupation tax for the applicable calendar year shall be subject to a civil penalty in the form of a percentage of the tax owed, to be determined by the length of the delinquency as indicated in subsection (b). 
(b)  Amount of penalty. 

 
  
(c)  The city clerk shall not issue a business license to any person that is delinquent in paying occupation tax until such person has paid both the principal tax amount and the penalty amount provided for in this section. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 11-49, 11-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-51. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those business regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1, et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-52. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-53. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns estimating gross receipts for the current calendar year. 
All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the current calendar year. Each business subject to this tax shall, between January 1 and January 15 of each calendar year, file with the city clerk a good faith estimate of the business' gross receipts for the current calendar year on a form provided by the city clerk. Said return shall be signed under oath by an officer, partner, or owner of the business. Said estimated amounts shall in no event be less than the amount of gross receipts on an annual basis returned on the business' most recent actual return as provided for in section 11-54. This estimated return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments of the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be determined in accordance with a final return made after year end as provided hereafter. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-54. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during a calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  At the same time that a business files an estimate of gross receipts for the current year as required by section 11-53, each business shall also file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the year preceding the immediately preceding calendar year. Said return shall be signed under oath by an officer, partner, or owner of the business. 
(b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the current calendar year was conducted for only part of the year preceding the immediately preceding year the amount of gross receipts for such part of said year shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax owing for the year, preceding the immediately preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided by this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate established pursuant to section 11-53 hereof, the difference in amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to Clarkston on or before January 15 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 15. 
(d)  If the amount of the occupation tax paid for the year preceding the immediately preceding year based on the estimated return provided for in section 11-53 and on the rate of said tax provided by this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax actually owed by said business based on the actual return for said year pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section, then the difference in said amounts shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if such business is continuing within the city, the city shall treat such amount as a credit toward the estimated taxes due for the current year. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 11-55, 11-56. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-57. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) place or where the business includes more than one (1) line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accord with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominate line at each location. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-58. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any city employee or officer, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. The information received in such returns and the returns themselves are not subject to public scrutiny under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq. See O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-59. - Inspections of books and records. 
The finance department, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books and records, including sales and income tax returns filed with the state and federal governments, for the business or person for which the returns are made. The finance department shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business for which the return was made in Clarkston, and upon demand of the finance department such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the business' license to do business in Clarkston. If, after examination of the books, tax returns, or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law and penalties provided for by this Code. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-60. - Business license to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, or permit inspection of books. 
Upon failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, upon failure to make any of said returns by their due date, upon failure to make a true return, upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, tax returns or records as required above, any business license granted by the city under this chapter shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business license shall be issued by the city until the event which caused revocation has been cured or satisfied. Revocation of a business license shall have no effect upon the city's right to collect any delinquency or to enforce the other civil or criminal penalties provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-61. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the finance department, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax. The lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. Said lien shall bear interest in the same manner as other tax liens of the city, and shall be subject to levy and sale as provided in the ordinances of said city. 
(b)  In addition to the other remedies provided for in this chapter, the sheriff or marshal may proceed to collect unpaid occupation tax in the same manner as provided for at law for tax executions. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Secs. 11-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-63. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
Sec. 11-64. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons for such grant shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSING 

Sec. 11-65. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in this article shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
The term massage or massages or massage therapy shall mean the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state. 
The term massage apparatus shall mean any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a "massage therapist" for the purpose of administering a "massage" 
The term massage apprentice shall mean any person who by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another, or use and operation of "massage apparatus," administers a "massage" in connection with a formal program of apprenticeship and training. 
The term massage establishment shall mean any business established for profit which employs one (1) or more "message therapists," or operates or maintains for profit one (1) or more "massage apparatus", and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of "massages". This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
The term massage therapist shall mean any person who for good or valuable consideration administers a "massage" 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-66. - Licenses/permits required. 
(a)  Message therapist license. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages as a massage therapist without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Massage establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage therapist to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Massage apprentice permit. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages as a massage apprentice without having obtained a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-67. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses and permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city, county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: (i) any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by the state while engaged in the practice of said profession; or (ii) any hospital or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state; or (iii) any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of Georgia. 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, county, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-68. - Application process. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment license or massage therapist license shall first make application to DeKalb County pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of DeKalb County as codified in article VIII of chapter 15 and obtain a valid license from DeKalb County. Such county license shall be current and must be presented to the city clerk prior to obtaining a license in the city. 
(b)  Applications to the city shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the city and shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence address of the applicant within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Written proof that the applicant is over eighteen (18) years of age; 
(4)  The applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair; 
(5)  All convictions, pleas of guilty or pleas of nolo contendere for violations of any law and the grounds and disposition of any pending charges against the applicant; 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders or partners, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(c)  All license applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to defray the cost of processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-69. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Message therapist. No applicant shall be issued a license as a message therapist unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must have obtained and hold a current license as a message therapist from DeKalb County issued pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 15, DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The applicant must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of five (5) years prior to the filing of the application; and 
(3)  One of the following is established. 
a.  The applicant must be the holder of a diploma or certificate earned by the applicant from a state certified school, representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of message therapy education and study of not less than five hundred (500) classroom hours consisting of a curriculum of anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects; or 
b.  The applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than one thousand (1,000) hours in a regularly licensed massage establishment in which the applicant has received massage therapy training and experience in anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects. 
(b)  Massage establishment. No applicant shall be issued a license for a massage establishment unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must have obtained and hold a current license as a message establishment from DeKalb County issued pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 15, DeKalb County Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  The applicant, including the partner applying on behalf of a partnership and an agent applying on behalf of a corporation, must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of five (5) years prior to the filing of the application; 
(3)  A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of Georgia or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in Georgia. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. A massage therapist who is a sole proprietor shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment license; 
(4)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Clarkston; 
(5)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordances with the Uniform Building Code of DeKalb County, and additionally, at least one (1) artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided and be kept illuminated in each enclosed room or booth; 
(6)  Examining tables and other equipment in the establishment shall be specifically designed for and appropriate to the provision of professional therapeutic massage and related therapy. Ordinary beds shall not be permitted in any licensed massage establishment; 
(7)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy; 
(8)  The establishment shall be located in a district within the city which is zoned MI (Light Industry District) and shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any establishment which is licensed under the city ordinances regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-70. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review of applications. If a license application is submitted in proper form accompanied by proof that the applicant has a current license issued by DeKalb County in accordance with Article VIII of Chapter 15 of its Code of Ordinances, including all information required by this article, and accompanied by the correct fee, the application shall be accepted by the city clerk and a review of the application and an inspection and background investigation shall be conducted by the chief of police who shall submit a summary of his investigation to the city clerk. 
(b)  Action on application. Upon receipt of this background investigation and completion of a review by the city clerk, the city clerk shall act on the application. The city clerk shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet the application requirements specified herein; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 11-69; or 
(3)  Contains false information in the application or any attachments thereto. 
Otherwise, the clerk shall approve the application and license shall be issued upon payment of any applicable city business or occupational taxes. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid through December 31 of the year in which they are issued. If an application is denied, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for a license under this article for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. If the city clerk fails to act upon an application within in thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application, it shall be accepted and a license shall be issued. 
(c)  Appeals of denials of applications. In the event the city clerk denies a license or apprentice permit application, such denial shall be in writing, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Within ten (10) days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. The city clerk shall schedule a hearing on the appeal before the city council, said hearing to take place within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall provide written notice thereof to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the city clerk may each present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel or may appear in his own behalf. 
The city council shall find for the appellant if it finds the city clerk's action was based on an erroneous finding of fact or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the city council may reverse or affirm, or may modify, the decision appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the city clerk and may issue or direct the issuance of a license or apprentice permit provided all requirements imposed by applicable law are met. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-71. - Transfers and sales prohibited. 
All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-72. - Change of location. 
A change of location of a massage establishment premises may be approved by the finance department provided all general ordinances are complied with and the distance and location requirements set forth in section 11-69 are satisfied at the new location. There shall be a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for transfer of location. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-73. - Renewals. 
All valid licenses may be renewed for an additional annual period provided a renewal application meeting all of the requirements for an initial license application is submitted to the city clerk between January 1 and March 1 of the year for which renewal is sought and it is approved by the city clerk according to the same standards for an initial license. The fee for annual renewal shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-74. - Further requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license and permit holders and establishments. 
(1)  All massage therapists and massage apprentices shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this provision, "completely clothed" shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either a blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms, head and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two (2) inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this subsection shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(2)  Massage of the human genitals or anus within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(3)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is strictly prohibited. 
(4)  Every person to whom a license or permit shall have been granted shall display said license or permit in a conspicuous place on the premises that is clearly visible to the public. 
(5)  The city, through the police department, shall have the right to inspect any licensed massage establishment and its records, at any time and without notice, during business hours to insure compliance with this article. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to administered a massage or frequent a massage establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of each person patronizing such massage establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment and/or massage therapist and/or massage apprentice administering massage to any underage patron. 
(7)  Licensed massage therapists shall have the authority to train individuals in massage therapy under their supervision and in their establishment only in accord with the following provisions. 
a.  Apprenticeship programs. Massages administered with massage establishments for good or valuable consideration may be given by person not holding a license as a massage therapist only in connection with a formal program of apprenticeship and training. Such massages shall be given only by such persons holding a valid massage apprentice permit pursuant to subsection (7)b. below and only under the direct supervision of a licensed massage therapist at all times. Said licensed massage therapist shall be in the same room where the massage is being administered by said permitted massage apprentice during the entire time of the giving of the massage. 
b.  Massage apprentice permits. No person shall administer a massage in connection with the formal apprenticeship and training program authorized in subsection (7)a. above without first having obtained a massage apprentice permit. Any person desiring to obtain a massage apprentice permit shall make application to the city clerk in accordance with section 11-68 of this article, except that the requirements of subsection (b)(6) of said section shall not apply. All applications for a massage apprentice permit shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The minimum standard applicable to issuance of a massage apprentice permit shall be that specified in section 11-69 (a)(1) and (2). If a massage apprentice permit application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required by this section and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and acted upon in accord with section 11-70. Massage apprentice permits shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed for two (2) additional periods of one (1) year each in accord with section 11-73. The renewal fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00.) Massage apprentice permits shall be subject to revocation for cause pursuant to the provisions of section 11-75 and subsection 11-76(a) of this article. All other applicable provisions of this article shall apply to said permit holders. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license for a massage establishment under this article to file with the city clerk the names of all employees other than those holding massage therapist licenses, their home address, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list with the names of new employees must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of any such change. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the police department or the DeKalb County Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-75. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be revoked except for due cause as herein defined, and after a hearing before the city council. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served by mail, registered postage fully prepaid addressed to the license holder at his or her place of business or residence at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint(s) against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(b)  "Due cause" for suspension or revocation of such license shall be as provided in section 11-76 of this article. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with due process and justice. 
(1)  The mayor shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the licensee and any response to those charges made by the licensee. 
(2)  The city council shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows. The city attorney shall present evidence in support of the charges, the licensee shall present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the city council may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. Following the presentation of evidence, the city council may have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days within which to issue its decision. 
(5)  The findings of the city council will be final unless within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision, the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-76. - Grounds for revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license, including by not limited to, loss of or failure to renew the license granted by DeKalb County pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 15 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being licensed in the practice of massage; 
(3)  The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he/she is unable to perform his or her professional duties; 
(5)  The holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor; 
(6)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(7)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law, or has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; or 
(9)  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(b)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license, including by not limited to, loss of or failure to renew the license granted by DeKalb County pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 15 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  The holder allows or permits any person who is not a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage in said establishment except as specifically authorized by section 11-66(c); 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, city or county laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants or general public; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the DeKalb County or city building or life safety codes; 
(5)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The holder of the license, including any person with an ownership interest in the license, has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law, or has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(7)  Any of the license holder's employees or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law, in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(9)  The holder or his employees associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this chapter. 
(c)  Any massage therapist, massage apprentice or massage establishment who has his or her license or permit revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for a period of twelve (12) months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-77. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of violation of a city ordinance and shall be punished as provided section 1-7 of this Code. Violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Sec. 11-78. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or injoining thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No massage establishment shall operate at any location nor on any premises which does not comply with all building code, fire safety code, and other ordinances and laws of DeKalb County, the City of Clarkston, and the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 10-6-98) 
Secs. 11-79—11-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 381, § 1, adopted Oct.7, 2014 , repealed former Art. IV, §§ 11-91—11-95, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 349, § 1(Attach.), adopted Nov. 2, 2010. 

Sec. 11-91. - Definition. 
Coin-operated amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object, the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, and which affords an award to a successful player. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 11-92. - License required. 
(a)  Every individual offering to the public the use of a coin-operated amusement machine at his business location shall obtain a license from the city for the privilege to operate such coin-operated amusement machine within the city. Said license shall be obtained from the city no later than December 31st of the preceding year and shall be valid for one calendar year. 
(b)  The license issued by the city shall be prominently displayed in the business location where the business owner operates one or more coin-operated amusement machines. 
(c)  Coin-operated amusement machine licenses are non-transferable and non-assignable as between owners or locations. Licenses issued pursuant to this section expire upon the death of the individual licensee. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 11-93. - Application for license. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license pursuant to this article shall file a written application with the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk, which shall specify at a minimum: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses; 
(2)  The address of the premises where the licensed coin-operated amusement machine is to be operated, together with the character of the business carried on in such place; 
(3)  A list of the number of machines to be maintained on the premises and a description of each such machine; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of such machine or machines, if other than the applicant; 
(5)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude within the past two (2) years and has never been found guilty of violating any state law concerning gambling or coin-operated amusement machines. 
(b)  Applicant must attach a true and correct copy of the state license issued for each coin-operated amusement machine. 
(c)  Applicant must have a valid current business license with the city for the location. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 11-94. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
Acceptance of a license pursuant to this article constitutes consent by the licensee for the city police and code enforcement to freely enter upon the licensed business premises during operating hours for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. If a licensee or his employee or designee in any way interferes with the police or code enforcement's right of inspection pursuant to this section, then the city may revoke his license. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ) 
Sec. 11-95. - Regulations for operation of coin-operated amusement machines. 
(a)  Machines to be kept in plain view. Every coin-operated amusement machine within the city shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view. For purposes of this section, plain view requires that the machine be visible through a window from the exterior of the location and shall also be visible from the main entryway of the location. No coin-operated amusement machine shall be located behind a doorway, in a back room or side room, or in any other location that is not in plain view as defined by this section. 
(b)  Gambling prohibited. Nothing in this article is intended to permit any gambling device as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2). Use of a licensed coin-operated amusement machine for gambling in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-21 shall be grounds for revocation of all coin-operated amusement machine licenses held by the person found to have offered or permitted gambling on the licensed premises. 
(c)  Number of machines limited. No location may offer to the public more than six Class B coin-operated amusement machines that reward the player. Rewards are limited exclusively to noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates, or novelties. 
(d)  Disclosures required. 
(1)  The owner or operator of a business location which offers to the public any coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player must inform all employees of the prohibitions and penalties set out in subsections (e), (f), and (g) of official Code of Georgia Section 16-12-35. 
(2)  The owner or possessor of any coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player must inform each location owner or location operator of the business location where such machine is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in subsections (e), (f), and (g) of official Code of Georgia Section 16-12-35. 
(3)  Every location owner or location operator of any business location which offers to the public one or more coin operated amusement machines must post prominently in the location a notice including the following language: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF THIS MACHINE.; 
(e)  Monthly reporting required; audits. Every location owner or location operator subject to paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of official Code of Georgia Section 50-27-84 must provide the city clerk with a copy of each verified monthly report prepared in accordance with such Code section. The city is authorized, at its discretion, to conduct an annual audit of such reports from the location owner or location operator. 
(f)  Proximity to certain uses of property. No license for a coin-operated amusement machine may be obtained for a location: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) yards of the property line of any single family residence; 
(2)  within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of any public park, or the entrance of any church or library; 
(3)  Within two hundred (200) yards of the property line of any school or school grounds. 
(g)  Proportion of revenue limited. No business location licensed to offer coin-operated amusement machines pursuant to this article shall derive more than fifty (50) percent of its monthly gross retail receipts from coin-operated amusement machines, provided that revenues due to a master licensee or the Georgia Lottery Corporation shall not be deemed revenue derived from coin-operated machines. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 3-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-95.5. - Penalty for violation; appeal. 
(a)  Conviction in the municipal court for any violation of this article will be punished by a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for up to six (6) months. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty imposed, conviction in the municipal court for violation of subsection 11-95(e) or (g) of this article or conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction for violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84 will result in immediate revocation of all city licenses for coin-operated amusement machines held by the location owner or location operator so convicted. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty imposed upon conviction, the city may revoke any license granting authority to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages, or any other license granted by the city as a penalty for conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of subsection (e), (f), or (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 by any court of competent jurisdiction. Revocation of such permits under this section will not become effective until after due process is provided pursuant to subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
(d)  Whenever a coin-operated amusement machine license is denied, not renewed, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this article, the city clerk shall promptly provide written notice of such action, including the reason(s) therefor to the licensee or applicant by hand delivery or certified mail. 
(e)  Upon delivery of the notice contemplated by subsection (d), the applicant or licensee aggrieved by such action shall have fifteen (15) days to file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting held not less than ten (10) days after the date of appeal. At such hearing, the aggrieved applicant or licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, present evidence, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. On appeal to the city council, the aggrieved licensee or applicant for coin-operated amusement machine license shall bear the burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the denial, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the license was not justified. Unless the licensee is appealing a license revocation resulting from conviction for violating this article in the municipal court, action to revoke or suspend an existing license shall not become effective pending the city council hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final, subject to petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
( Ord. No. 381, § 1(attach.), 10-7-14 ; Ord. No. 393, § 2, 3-1-16 ) 
Editor's note— Section 11-95.5 was renumbered by the editor from § 11-96 to avoid conflicts in section numbering. 
ARTICLE V. - MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 11-96. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Certified building inspector. A person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one (1) of the following certifications from SBCCI (ICC): Property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
Code compliance certificate. A certificate, substantially similar to Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report. The report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease. Any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multi-family rental dwellings or multi-family rental units. 
Multi-family rental dwelling. Any multi-family structure, multi-family building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to multiple family dwellings, multiple family apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multi-family rental unit. Any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multi-family rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Occupancy. Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit. 
Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
Owner-occupied. Any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multi-family rental units. Example: two-family dwelling, owner occupies one (1) flat; rooming house, owner occupies one (1) unit. 
Premises. Any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 12-369, § 1(Attach.), 9-4-12) 
Sec. 11-97. - Fee and certificate required. 
(a)  All owners of multi-family rental dwellings or multi-family rental unit(s) within the city that make available for lease or receive income for use of four (4) or more such dwellings or units must obtain a business license from the city pursuant to this article. If the multi-family rental dwelling meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 by having an onsite/offsite rental or management office location, then the owner shall be subject to an occupation tax as provided in this article. 
(b)  All owners of multi-family rental dwellings or multi-family rental unit(s) within the city that make available for lease or receive income for use of four (4) or more such dwellings or units shall register such dwellings/units with the city and pay a regulatory fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) on an annual basis, whether or not the multi-family rental dwelling is subject to occupation tax. 
(c)  Each owner of a multi-family rental dwelling shall submit a code compliance certificate annually with their business license renewal. Such annual code compliance certificate shall cover at least twenty (20) percent of the units within each dwelling, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five (5) years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. When a newly constructed or remodeled multi-family rental dwelling receives a certificate of occupancy, additional inspections pursuant to this section are not required for one (1) year. After one (1) year has elapsed, regular annual inspection of twenty (20) percent of units shall commence and continue as required by this section. 
(d)  Furthermore, each owner and certified building inspector shall keep a written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be available to the city upon request. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten (10) business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
(e)  If inspection of such dwellings or units by a certified building inspector results in a determination that further work is necessary to comply with all applicable building and life safety codes and the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the chief building official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the chief building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one (1) year for completion of repairs and compliance with this ordinance. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 12-369, § 1(Attach.), 9-4-12; Ord. No. 416 , § 1, 10-3-17) 
Sec. 11-98. - Failure to provide code compliance certificate. 
(a)  Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this article and is subject to those penalties contained herein Clarkston's Code of Ordinances. Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit(s) to inspection by the city building official and fines imposed by the municipal court, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be at the sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for collection of taxes. Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance and is subject to those penalties set forth in this article. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as provided in section 5-l of this Code of Ordinances of the City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-369, § 1(Attach.), 9-4-12) 
Exhibit "A"  CODE COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE 
Building Department 
City of Clarkston City Hall 
3921 Church Street Clarkston, Georgia 30021 
Re: [Name and address of Apartment Community] 
Date: ____________   Total Number of Units: ____________ 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ Units Inspected (Listed individually) 
The undersigned is a Certified Building Inspector pursuant to City of Clarkston Ordinance section 11-96 and provides this certification pursuant to such Ordinance. 
Those apartment units listed on the inspection reports attached hereto have been inspected and found to be in compliance with applicable building codes of the City of Clarkston currently in effect. 
For purposes of this certification, compliance with applicable building codes shall be deemed to mean that those units inspected meet those certain minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for dwellings as set forth on the inspection reports attached hereto. 
In the event that the undersigned is an employee of the owner or property manager of the community, the undersigned is acting only in such capacity and shall incur no personal liability in connection with such inspections. 
Nothing herein imposes any liability on the City of Clarkston or prevents the City of Clarkston from enforcing Georgia Minimum Standard Codes as provided by Georgia law and the Clarkston Code of Ordinances. 
Certified and sworn this ____________ day of ____________ ,200__ 
[Signature of Inspector] 
Name: _____ 
Registration Number: _____ 
Certification Held: _____ 
INSPECTION REPORT 
Name of Community: _____     
Apartment No.: ____________  Date of Inspection: ____________ 

 
(Ord. No. 12-369, § 1(Attach.), 9-4-12) 
Secs. 11-99—11-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FAIR HIRING PRACTICES 

Sec. 11-101. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Adverse action means a refusal to hire, a refusal to promote, or the revocation of an offer of employment or promotion. 
Application means a written or oral expression of interest in a job by an individual made in compliance with the employer's established criteria for receiving expressions of interest. 
City means the City of Clarkston and all city agencies, departments and offices. 
Conditional employment offer means an oral or written offer by an employer to employ an individual in a job, or placement in a staffing agency's staffing pool, that is conditioned solely on the employer's subsequent evaluation of the individual's criminal history. 
Covered contract means a contract that is not exempted by the terms of this article and is let to a covered employer by the city for the furnishing of services pursuant to a bidding process, whether formal or informal, or a contract specifically designated as covered by this article by the Clarkston City Council. 
Covered Employer means a person, company, corporation, firm, labor organization, or association that enters into a Covered Contract with the City. The term includes an agency acting on behalf of an employer. The term does not include: 
(1)  The United States; 
(2)  A corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; 
(3)  The State of Georgia or a state agency; or 
(4)  A political subdivision of the state. 
Criminal history means an arrest, conviction, plea of nolo contendere, or deferred adjudication arising from a felony criminal accusation, or a Class A or Class B misdemeanor criminal accusation, made under state law, federal law, or a comparable law of another state of the United States; 
Individualized assessment means an evaluation of the criminal history of an individual performed by an employer that includes offering the applicant an opportunity to explain his/her criminal history and consideration of, at a minimum, the following factors: 
(1)  The nature and gravity of any offenses in the individual's criminal history and any mitigating circumstances; 
(2)  The length of time since the offense and completion of the sentence; 
(3)  The nature and duties of the job for which the individual has applied; and 
(4)  Evidence of rehabilitation. 
Public works construction means the designing, engineering, building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or infrastructure or other public improvements of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-102. - Fair hiring practices for employment with the city. 
Except for such jobs exempted by section 11-105(a), the city shall observe each of the following fair hiring practices: 
(a)  The city shall not solicit or otherwise inquire about the criminal history of an individual in an application for a job. 
(b)  The city shall not publish or cause to be published information about a job that states or implies that an individual's criminal history automatically disqualifies the individual from consideration for the job. 
(c)  The city shall not solicit criminal history information about an individual or consider an individual's criminal history unless the city has first made a conditional employment offer to the individual. This does not preclude the city from explaining to applicants, in writing, the individualized assessment system that the city uses to consider criminal history. 
(d)  The city shall not refuse to consider employing an individual because the individual did not provide criminal history information before the individual received a conditional employment offer. 
(e)  The city shall not take adverse action against an individual because of the individual's criminal history unless the city has determined that the individual is unsuitable for the job based on an individualized assessment conducted by the city. 
(f)  When the city takes adverse action against an individual based on the individual's criminal history, it must inform the individual in writing that the adverse action was based on the individual's criminal history. 
(g)  The city shall not inquire about any arrest or criminal accusation made against an applicant which is not then pending against that person and which did not result in a conviction. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-103. - Applicability to private employers. 
(a)  Mandatory applicability. Except for jobs exempted by section 11-105, every covered contract entered into by the city with a covered employer shall require the covered employer that contracts with the city to comply with fair hiring practices by refraining from undertaking the conduct designated as prohibited in subsection (c) of this section as a condition precedent to the covered contract with the city becoming effective. 
(b)  City council designated covered contracts. The city council may designate any contract for services which it approves as a covered contract regardless of whether or not such contract would otherwise meet the definition of a covered contract under this article and regardless of whether or not the contractor or vendor that proposes to contract with the city would otherwise qualify as a covered employer as defined in this article. Any contract so designated as a covered contract by the city council shall require the employer contracting with the city to refrain from undertaking the conduct prohibited by subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct for employers engaged in covered contracts. 
(1)  The employer shall not include any question regarding criminal history on its printed and/or on-line employment application forms. 
(2)  The employer shall not make any inquiry into an applicant's criminal history until a conditional employment offer is made to the applicant. 
(3)  The employer shall not publish any information regarding a job that states or implies that an individual's criminal history automatically disqualifies him from consideration for a job. 
(4)  The employer shall not refuse to consider an application because the applicant did not provide his criminal history prior to receiving a conditional employment offer. 
(5)  The employer shall not take adverse action against an individual based on his criminal history unless the employer simultaneously notifies the individual in writing that such adverse action was based on his criminal history. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-104. - Best practices. 
(a)  A contractor participating in a bid process for a contract with the city, whether or not such contractor would otherwise qualify as a covered employer as defined herein, may elect to voluntarily observe the prohibitions set forth in section 11-103(c), and/or one or more of the following fair hiring best practices: 
(1)  If a criminal history investigation is required by state and/or Federal law for a position, the background screening will be conducted after the employer has determined that the applicant is otherwise qualified, and the employer has made a conditional offer of employment to the applicant. 
(2)  The employer's consideration of a criminal history must involve an individualized assessment. 
(3)  The written notice of adverse action based on criminal history will include a summary of the results of the employer's Individualized assessment of the applicant's criminal history. 
(b)  A contractor's willingness to voluntarily observe fair hiring prohibitions and/or best practices should be presented to the city when bidding on a contract. Such willingness shall be a factor which is considered by the city when deciding the successful bidder for a contract that is not strictly a "low bid" situation. When a contractor voluntarily commits to fair hiring best practices, such practices shall be included in the contract in the same manner contemplated by section 11-103 for covered contracts. 
(c)  The city manager shall maintain a list of contractors that have demonstrated a commitment to observing fair hiring practices pursuant to section 11-103(c) and/or have voluntarily submitted themselves to best practices pursuant to this section. The contractors identified on such list shall be given preference when the city enters into a contract for services, whether bidding is required or not. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-105. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The city shall not be required to comply with section 11-102 when hiring a post certified law enforcement officer. 
(b)  If a criminal background investigation is required by state and/or federal law for a position, then an employer is not required to follow section 11-103 when hiring for such position, unless such employer voluntarily agrees to do so pursuant to section 11-104. 
(c)  When the procurement process does not result in a responsive bid from any contractor that is willing to abide by the terms of section 11-103, the city manager should re-start the procurement process in an attempt to identify a contractor that will meet the requirements of section 11-103 unless the need for such services constitutes an emergency. In case of emergency or when two or more attempts at procurement do not identify a qualified contractor that is willing to abide by the terms of section 11-103, the city manager may issue an exemption to the most responsive contractor that bid on the contract such that the terms of this article will not apply to such contract so exempted. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter limits an employer's authority to withdraw a conditional offer of employment for any lawful reason, including the determination that an individual is unsuitable for the job based on an individualized assessment of the individual's criminal history. 
(e)  Public works construction contracts with a value of greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall not be subject to mandatory participation in fair hiring practices pursuant to section 11-103. However, the city will include a preference in public works construction request for proposal solicitations that are not strictly "low bid" for contractors that agree to voluntarily observe fair hiring best practices pursuant to section 11-104. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-106. - Compliance. 
(a)  Each employer engaged in a covered contract with the city must provide the city with a copy of their employment application form as a precondition to their contract with the city becoming effective. 
(b)  Each covered contract shall provide that violation of this article shall be cause for suspension or termination of the covered contract and shall provide for payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as liquidated damages to the city as a reasonable estimate of actual damages incurred by the city in the event that a covered contract is terminated by the city due to the employer's non-compliance with this article. 
(c)  Each employer engaged in a covered contract with the city shall submit a sworn written affirmation of compliance with this article along with each invoice or application for payment as a precondition to receiving any payment from the city contemplated by a covered contract. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall conduct periodic, random reviews of employers currently engaged in performance of a covered contract to assess compliance with this article. 
(e)  If the city manager determines that an employer has failed to comply with section 11-103 or, if made applicable by a contractor's voluntary commitment to comply therewith, section 11-104, then the city manager or designee may act to suspend the covered contract in whole or in part pursuant to a written "Notice of Noncompliance," with continuance of the covered contract conditioned upon a satisfactory showing to the city manager of the employer's commitment to comply with this article. 
(f)  Should an employer fail to comply with a "Notice of Noncompliance" as specified above, then the city manager may make a final determination of noncompliance and terminate the covered contract. 
(g)  The city shall keep a record of all violations of this article by employers. A history of violation of the article shall be a factor which is considered by the city when deciding upon any future awards of contracts and may form the basis for denying any future contracts to such employer. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-107. - Reporting by city manager. 
The city manager shall make a report on compliance with this article, exemptions pursuant to section 11-105(c) and any related matters to the city council on a quarterly basis. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Secs. 11-108, 11-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 11-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 44-12-130, should those definitions differ. 
Employee means any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Month means that period of time from one date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pawnshop means a pawnbroker's physical location and/or any place where Pawn transactions occur. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-111. - Employees. 
No person shall be an employee of a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the Clarkston police department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure that his employees are in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-112. - General policies and purposes. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers may operate only after the issuance of a license for such operation by City of Clarkston and only in the manner permitted by such license. Pawn transactions may only occur through a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this article and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law and subject to being revoked by the city. 
(c)  Each licensee of the city shall display the license issued under this article prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-113. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No pawnshop shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other pawnshop. This distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  No pawnshop shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)  From any structures in residential use. 
(2)  From any public or private school. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility. 
(4)  From any public library branch. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility. 
The distance in subsection (b)(1)-(6), notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in subsection (a), shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, to the closest property line of any use identified above. 
(c)  Applicants for license to operate a pawnshop shall include with their application a plat of survey prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state certifying that all of the locational requirements listed above in subsections (a) and (b) have been met. 
(d)  Grandfathering. Any business holding a valid city business license and operating as pawnbroker on November 1, 2016, shall be exempt from the location restrictions of this section for so long as such business remains at the same location under a valid business license and does not expand its facility at such location, until December 31, 2019, when this grandfathering provision shall expire. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ; Ord. No. 408, § 1, 3-21-17 ) 
Sec. 11-114. - Qualifications for issuance of license. 
Any person who desires to obtain a license for the operation of a pawnshop must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the applications process. If the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder and each principle officer of the corporation must meet the qualifications as part of the application process. 
(a)  No owner, pawnbroker or any person connected with operating a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony theft, burglary, robbery, or a violation of the "Family Violence Act." 
(b)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who is under the age of eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  All persons filing an application for a pawnshop license will be required to complete a waiver in order for the applicant's criminal history to be obtained. 
(d)  No license shall be granted where the applicant has had any pawnshop license issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked. 
(e)  No license shall be granted for a location that is not in compliance with any federal, state, or local regulation including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy, a City of Clarkston certificate of occupancy and the location restrictions of this Article. 
(f)  No license shall be issued where the applicant has supplied false information in the license application or where any required fee has not been paid by such applicant, including any fees or assessments owed to the city. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-115. - Annual permit. 
Before operating a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with the municipal police department for a permit pursuant to the following: 
(a)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(b)  No permit to operate a pawnshop shall be issued until a regulatory fee in the amount of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) is paid to the city. Such fee shall be in addition to applicable occupation tax and business licensing fees and is intended to offset expense incurred by the city to administer this article; 
(c)  The application shall state the physical address of the pawnshop; 
(d)  The application shall contain the full name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, e-mail address, Social Security number, and date of birth and of any employee, owner, or pawnbroker; 
(e)  The chief of police or designee shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the city council whether such applicant is a person of good character and has not been convicted of a criminal offense an indicated in this article. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-116. - Application. 
(a)  All applications required in section 11-115, annual permit, shall be in writing and on forms provided by the municipal police department. 
(b)  All applications shall be completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person(s) who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such license, as may be requested by the city council, the municipal police department, or other official designated by the city council. The failure to produce such persons within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(d)  Each applicant shall certify on the application that they have read this article and, if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this article on the premises. 
(e)  Once an application, accompanying documents, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the municipal police department, the police department shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, the municipal police department shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application and deliver such documents to the city clerk. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant meets the requirements set by this article and all other requirements of this ordinance are satisfied, then the city clerk shall schedule the application for hearing at the next regularly scheduled public hearing calendar before the city council and shall so inform the applicant of this fact before such meeting. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this article, or if the applicant fails to meet all other requirements outlined by this article, then the city clerk shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal. Such appeal shall be before the city council in accordance with section 11-126, Appeal procedure, of this article. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial of the license. 
(f)  Any application that the city clerk determines to satisfy all the requirements outlined in this article, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report of the municipal police department, shall be scheduled for review at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the city council. At that meeting, the applicant and any person opposed to such application has the right to present to the city council any information that the city council determines is relevant to the licensing decision. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the city council shall look to the qualifications set forth in this article and consider the public interest and welfare of the citizens of the city. The council shall have the discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the city council shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing, unless the decision is postponed for purposes of obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. Notice of the decision by the city council shall be mailed to the applicant. If the application is denied, such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal. Such appeal shall be taken solely in accord with section. 11-126, Appeal procedure, of this article. 
(g)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the date of denial. 
(h)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this article may be served. This person must be an individual and must be a resident of city. The licensee shall submit the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, to the city clerk. The identity of the agent may also be submitted contemporaneous to filing the license application. 
(i)  Upon approval by the city council of the application for a license, the city clerk shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the application is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-116.5. - Employee permits. 
(a)  No person shall work in a pawnshop unless he first obtains a permit pursuant to this section. 
(b)  To obtain a permit to work as an employee of a pawnshop, the applicant shall submit to a criminal background check to be performed by the municipal police department, provide all necessary information, and pay a non-refundable fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(c)  If the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within the past five (5) years, the city clerk shall issue a permit. 
(d)  Subsequent indictment of a permittee for committing a felony or crime of moral turpitude shall operate to immediately revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-117. - Commencement and forfeiture. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this article must, within six (6) months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license, unless such period is extended by the city clerk. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to in this subsection within the six-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holders of a license under this article who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity for any further action by the city. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-118. - Renewals and transfers. 
(a)  Any license holder subject to this ordinance shall apply for renewal of any existing license and shall pay the annual license fee no later than February 15th of each calendar year in which it does business. 
(b)  No license granted for a pawnshop shall be transferable except upon application to the municipal police department in the same form and manner, and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another applicant doing the same business at the same place as the license holder to whom the license was originally issued upon approval of a new application pursuant to section 11-116. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-119. - Disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Nonpledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven (7) calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-120. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-121. - Hours of operation. 
All holders of licenses under this division shall operate only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-122. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker's license or permit, to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods was stolen or lost when presented by seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the pawnbroker shall surrender such item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent upon demand. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-123. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of an issued license by the city council shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the city council consistent with the procedures set forth in section 11-126, Appeal procedure, and only upon the following occurrences: 
(a)  Any license issued under this article for the operation of a pawnshop shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet or property therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 11-118, Renewals and transfers, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall be grounds for the city council to revoke any license issued under this article. 
(c)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the city council upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The city council shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the qualifications set forth in this article at any time such information becomes known to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-124. - Record of transactions. 
Every pawnbroker shall maintain a written record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop. Such records shall be maintained by the pawnbroker for one year from the date of such transaction and may be inspected by the Clarkston police department at any time. Each record of a transaction shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The full name, street address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.) 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought. 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-125. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city council for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a city ordinance violation and shall be punished by up to six (6) months confinement and up to a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Sec. 11-126. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of an administrative denial, or upon alleged violation of those items in section 11-123, Suspension and revocation of license, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city council and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The city clerk shall also state in the written notice the basis for the administrative denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the city attorney and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The city council shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his case, to rebut the allegations made against him, and present whatever defenses he has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. An opportunity for rebuttal shall be provided. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the city council shall be reduced to writing and forwarded to the adverse party by certified mail. 
(e)  The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of DeKalb County via certiorari within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written notification to the adverse party of the council's decision. 
( Ord. No. 399, § 1(Attach.), 11-1-16 ) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 280, § 1, adopted Mar. 2, 2004, amended former Ch. 12, Arts. I, II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968 and the following ordinances: 

 

 
Charter reference— Authority to prohibit determined acts, § 1.03(n); authority to commit and work prisoners, § 1.03(r); authority to punish violators, § 1.03(v). 
Cross reference— Nuisances, 10-1 et seq; waste, trash, junk, etc., § 10-10 et seq; noise, § 10-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow, or encourage such minor to violate any section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-2. - Commercial soliciting and soliciting for funds in residential areas. 
The following provisions shall serve the interests of safety, fraud, and the protection of residents' privacy. This section shall not be construed to include non-commercial door-to-door canvassing of any sort, which is protected by the United States Constitution, requires no permit, and may be done anonymously. 
(a)  Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in the sale of any product or service, or the solicitation of funds by going door-to-door in residential areas of the city, whether on a temporary or permanent basis, shall first register with the department of public safety of the county by completing a personal information questionnaire and receiving a personal identification card which shall be the registrant's permit to engage in the sale of products or services. 
(b)  The department of public safety shall provide each person completing such questionnaire with an identification card of suitable size which shall have thereon the following information: 
(1)  The name of the card bearer; and 
(2)  The card bearer's residence and telephone number; and 
(3)  The card bearer's nationality; and 
(4)  The card bearer's date of birth; and 
(5)  The card bearer's physical characteristics, including height, weight, hair color, eye color, color of complexion; and 
(6)  The card bearer's gender; and 
(7)  The card bearer's photograph; and 
(8)  The card bearer's thumb print; and 
(9)  Where applicable, any other identifying physical characteristics of the card bearer, such as scars or birthmarks; and 
(10)  The name and address of the business represented; and 
(11)  The expiration date, which shall be between sixty (60) days and one (1) year from the date of issue; and 
(12)  The card bearer's personal signature; and 
(13)  The signature or facsimile of the director of public safety. 
(c)  Violations. It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts when engaging in the sale of products or services or the solicitation of funds: 
(1)  To engage in the sale of products or services or the solicitation of funds without having first registered with the police department and receiving the identification card; or 
(2)  To engage in the sale of products or services or the solicitation of funds without having the identification card on the person; or 
(3)  To lend one's identification card to any other person; or 
(4)  To use the identification card of another for any purpose whatsoever; or 
(5)  To refuse to show such identification card upon the request of any police officer, the occupant of any residence, apartment, apartment complex, or apartment complex manager or owner where registrant is making a call; or 
(6)  To engage in the sale of products or services or the solicitation of funds where the resident has clearly displayed a sign which reads "no soliciting" or any sign to that effect. 
(d)  Other: 
(1)  The questionnaire to be completed by the person seeking an identification card shall be furnished by the police chief. 
(2)  Any identification card bearer shall have the right to receive a new identification card upon application any time after the expiration of the current card. 
(3)  Any resident of the city may display on his or her property a sign reading "no soliciting" or any sign to that effect, provided that the sign is constructed and displayed in conformity with chapter 15.5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-3. - Picketing. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only on the public sidewalks maintained by the city, except that picketing and demonstrations may take place on the grassy area of Market Street, no more than six (6) feet from the curb. 
(2)  Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted in a manner that does not hamper, obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic. 
(3)  Picketing and demonstrations shall not be conducted in front of or be focused on any particular residence. 
(4)  Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted in a way that does not block entrances to any building, area, or other structure. 
(5)  Picketing and demonstrations shall not hamper, obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with the ability to enter or exit a building, area, or any other structure. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  The chief of police shall receive at least five (5) hours of notice in writing by the person planning to picket or demonstrate. 
(2)  This written notice shall include the name of the person planning to picket or demonstrate, and where applicable, the name of the organization planning to picket, and shall also include the name of the places or business, public facility or other location or entity which will be picketed and the hours that the picketing or demonstration will be conducted. 
(3)  At the request of the chief of police, the person planning to picket or demonstrate may be required to provide the city with an agreement to indemnify and save the city harmless for any damages, demands, or expenses of every character which may be in any way caused by the picketing or demonstration. 
(c)  Other. 
(1)  No person participating in picketing or demonstrations shall create any loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise, including any noise that is in violation of section 10-20 of this Code. 
(2)  No person participating in picketing or a demonstration shall use a bullhorn, microphone, loudspeaker, or any other means of magnifying one's voice. 
(3)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with any picketing or demonstration. 
(4)  If at any time picketing or a demonstration in any way obstructs, impedes, or otherwise interferes with any type of motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic, including traffic moving in and out of a building, participants shall disperse or move along as directed by a police officer. 
It shall be unlawful to refuse to disperse or move along if so directed by a police officer. 
(5)  Picketers and demonstrators shall not act in a way that violates any provision of this chapter or any other part of this Code, or the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 376, § 11, adopted Dec. 3, 2013 , repealed former § 12-4 in its entirety which pertained to parades and derived from Ord. No. 280, § 1, adopted March 2, 2004. 
Sec. 12-5. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in fortunetelling, palm reading, or any other act purporting to predict the future, where a charge, donation, or profit is made in exchange for such services. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-6. - Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, auction houses and junk dealers. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Junk. Any scrap, old scrap automobiles, iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rags, mutilated bags and sacks, rope, empty bottles, paper or bagging, rubber tires, batteries, tubes, boots and shoes, bones and hides, hose and electrical wiring or other articles of any kind that are useless for their original purpose. 
(3)  Junk dealer. Any person who shall purchase or make a business of purchasing, whether as principal or agent, junk, as defined in this section. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers, dealers in secondhand articles, auction houses and junk dealers shall furnish to the chief of police a full and complete list each day of every article taken in pawn, or bought by such dealers, giving a full description of such article, with the mark, number, brand, monogram, or letters, numbers, or other distinguishing features of any kind, on such articles so pawned or bought by such dealers in their places of business or outside their places of business. This list shall include fingerprinting of the right index finger of each person who pawns any article on the date for which the daily report is made. 
(2)  All pawnbrokers, dealers in secondhand articles, auction houses and junk dealers shall keep accounts, showing from whom all such articles were received and the hour and day of receipt, and they shall have their goods arranged in stock so as to enable the goods to be inspected by the police department. When it becomes necessary to visit any such dealer, the chief of police will give a written order to the proper officer to perform such duty and such dealer shall permit such officer to examine any article in such dealer's stock. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-7. - Shoplifting law adopted. 
Pursuant to the Official Georgia Code, § 16-8-14 of the Georgia Code, as amended, or as may hereafter from time to time be amended, known as "Theft by Shoplifting" is hereby adopted as an ordinance of this city, with like effect as if fully set out herein. Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-8. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 1, 1-1-11) 
Sec. 12-9. - Enforcement of watering restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in section 12-8. 
(b)  The police department shall be the enforcement authority for sections 12-8 and 12-9. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Any violation of sections 12-8 and 12-9 may be enforced by a citation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 1, 1-1-11) 
Secs. 12-10—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 12-20. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute disorderly conduct for any person within the city limits to violate any of the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  To act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; or 
(2)  To act in a violent or tumultuous whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; or 
(3)  To endanger or interfere with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats, or abusive conduct; or 
(4)  To be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; or 
(5)  To assemble in or to frequent any public place for deceitful, fraudulent, or unlawful purposes, or to aid and abet therein, as defined by the current ordinances of the city or this state; or 
State Law reference— Theft by deception, O.G.C.A. § 16-8-3. 
(6)  To accost or attempt to force one's company upon any person; or 
(7)  To utter while in a state of anger in the presence of another any obscene words or epithets or "fighting words;" or 
(8)  To aid, abet, or encourage a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-21. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. A person commits the act of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An exposure of the sexual organs; 
(2)  An appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; or 
(3)  An act of sexual intercourse; or 
(4)  Urinates or defecates in a public place other than a bathroom facility; or 
(5)  A caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibited conduct set forth in subsections 12-21(a)(1) and (2) of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons: 
(1)  Any child under the age of ten (10); or 
(2)  Any female person exposing a breast while breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years old. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-22. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
A person unlawfully consumes alcoholic beverages when he or she commits any of the following acts: 
(1)  To consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas or places of business patronized by the public in an intoxicated condition; or 
(2)  To be and appear in any public area or place of business patronized by the public in any intoxicated condition; or 
(3)  To drink any intoxicating beverage in any automobile on the streets of the city, whether such automobile is moving or parked; or 
(4)  To drink or possess any intoxicating beverage at any public place within the city; or 
(5)  To bring or carry into any enclosure, field, or stadium where events sponsored by or participated in are being held any intoxicating beverage, or to have any intoxicating beverage in his or her possession while in or on such enclosure, field, or stadium. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-23. - Interference with public transportation. 
A person unlawfully interferes with public transportation when he or she acts with the intent to obstruct, hinder, interfere with, or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation or operator of a public school bus or any other vehicle used for public transportation. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-24. - Sale of ice cream, etc., near schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, within two hundred and fifty (250) yards of any public school building located within the city, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., any ice cream, milk, fruit, or other edible products from a pushcart, truck, or other conveyance, or by means other than from a regulatory established building or store duly licensed to operate such a building. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-25. - Loitering. 
(a)  Generally. A person commits the act of loitering when the person is knowingly in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for a law-abiding individual under the circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(1)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, or refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. 
(2)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by his or her presence or conduct. 
(3)  No person shall be convicted of any offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(b)  For the purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, parking lots of hotels and motels, in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are the following: that that person is a known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, masturbator for hire or panderer and repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops, or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, or waving of arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords that person the opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (b) if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(2)  For the purpose of subsection (b)(1), "known prostitute, pimp, sodomist, panderer or masturbator for hire" is a person who, previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, had been convicted of a violation of a sexual related law of any city or law of any state defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
(3)  For the purpose of subsection (b)(1), "any person" shall also include panderers or solicitors of sexual acts, commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks," who loiter in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of participating in, procuring, purchasing or soliciting any sexual act for hire made illegal by state law. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are the following: that that person, while a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, repeatedly beckons to, attempts to stop, engages or attempts to engage in conversation with any person by hailing, waving arms or any bodily gesture for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution, sodomy, masturbation for hire or pandering. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances proscribing loitering and related acts for purposes of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24. 
(c)  For the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting an intent to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any provision of Title 16, Chapter 13, of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq.) 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such intent is manifested are the following: 
a.  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For the purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession, or sale of any controlled substance as defined in Title 16, Chapter 13 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq.), or such person who has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such title and chapter of the Official Code of Georgia, or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or 
b.  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; or 
c.  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang," or any other association which has been known to be engaged in illegal drug activity; or 
d.  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer; or 
e.  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; or 
f.  Such person manifestly possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances, including, but not limited to the following: crack pipes, push wires, chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools; or 
g.  Such person is seen driving or sitting in a vehicle that is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(d)  Minors. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the custody or control of any minor to permit, allow, or encourage such minor to violate this section. 
(e)  Responsibility of proprietor, managers, etc. It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager, or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow, or encourage any person to violate this section. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-25.1. - Possession of drug related objects prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess with the intent to use, any objects or materials of any kind for the purpose of planting, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing concealing, injecting, inhaling smoking, or other introducing into the human body marijuana or a controlled substance or substance used in an unlawful manner or manner not proscribed by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal any item, object, or material in violation of this section in any manner. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, Acontrolled substance@ shall have the same meaning as defined by State Law codified at O.C.G.A § 16-13-1(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 292, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 12-26. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Conviction for violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(c)  No person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by confinement for any period of time. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 12-27. - Throwing objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly throw or propel any stone, brick, piece of wood or other object at any person, vehicle, house, building, or other structure or object, or across or upon any private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-28. - Noise. 
It shall be unlawful to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise in violation of any provision of section 10-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-29. - Obstruction of a law enforcement officer; obstruction of a firefighter, EMS, paramedic or other emergency personnel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully obstruct or hinder any law enforcement officer, firefighter, EMS personnel, paramedic or other emergency personnel when such person is in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. 
(b)  A person commits the act of obstruction of a law enforcement officer when such person knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders a law enforcement officer by engaging in any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Fails or refuses to submit to arrest; 
(2)  Endangers or interferes with any law enforcement officer by taking flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  Endangers or interferes with any law enforcement officer by aiding another person in taking flight or by concealing another who is taking flight in any manner; 
(4)  Knowingly and willfully falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme or device a material fact from a law enforcement officer; makes a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry to a law enforcement officer; uses any false writing or document or identification knowing the same to contain false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or information with the intent to deceive any law enforcement officer engaged in the pursuit of his official duties; or 
(5)  Fails or refuses to stop for a safety checkpoint or takes flight to avoid a safety checkpoint. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 1, 4-5-05) 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 12-30. - Discharging weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, cannon, air rife, or to shoot a slingshot within the city, except when necessary for law enforcement officers or for the purpose of self defense, or by military officials when on drill or parade or at a funeral in honor of the dead. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-31. - Knives. 
It shall be unlawful to have, possess, or carry upon the streets or other public places of the city any of the following implements, unless such implements are securely wrapped so as to be not readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has an obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than three (3) inches including all knives such as butcher knives or other knives that do not close. 
(4)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-32. - Minors. 
In the event of the conviction under section 12-30 or 12-31 of any person who is a minor, the chief of police shall seize and retain the weapon or other instrument until any fine and costs imposed are paid. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-33. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area is identified by at least one sign as specified in this paragraph, and if the parking area contains more than one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces then by at least one (1) such sign for every one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces, each such sign containing the following information in easy to read print: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property which is reserved for customer use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automated teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; or 
c.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area or any authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a monetary fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third and each subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-34. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she knowingly and without authority: 
(1)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3)  Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor which is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-35. - Carrying a concealed weapon. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a concealed weapon when such person knowingly has or carries about his or her person, unless in an open manner and fully exposed to view, any bludgeon, metal knuckles, firearm, knife designed for the purpose of offense and defense, or any knife in violation of section 12-31 of this Code of Ordinances, or any of its subsections, in whole or in part, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character outside of his home or place of business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any concealed weapon in violation of this section 12-35 when such person knowingly has or carries in his or her vehicle in a manner in which such weapon is concealed in any manner unless the weapon is carried in an open manner and fully exposed to view or unless the weapon is in the glove compartment, console, trunk, or similar compartment so that the weapon is not available for immediate possession. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in the presence of or have knowledge of a concealed weapon in violation of this section 12-35 and fail to notify a law enforcement officer of the presence of such concealed weapon. 
(d)  The provisions of this code section 12-35 shall not apply to law enforcement officers, peace officers retired from state or federal law enforcement agencies, judges, magistrates, solicitors-general or district attorneys, or to any person in possession of a valid permit issued according to O.C.G.A § 16-11-129. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 12-36. - Safe play area requirement. 
(a)  Every "child play area," as defined by this section, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the nearest right-of-way line of any "major road" as defined by this section. 
(b)  In the alternative to providing the setback required by subsection (a), an "approved guardrail," as defined by this section, shall be installed between the right-of-way line of the "major road" and the fence required by Zoning Ordinance section 604(c). 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "child play area" shall mean any outdoor space designated for use by children at any daycare, nursery, child care center, kindergarten, school or other similar business. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "major road" shall mean any portion of the following streets: 
(1)  Brockett Road; 
(2)  Church Street; 
(3)  East Ponce de Leon Avenue; 
(4)  Montreal Road; 
(5)  Norman Road; and 
(6)  North Indian Creek Drive. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "approved guardrail" shall mean a guardrail that is constructed and installed in conformance with applicable current standards and specifications established by the Georgia Department of Transportation for State highways and has been inspected and approved by the city building official. 
( Ord. No. 410 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Secs. 12-37—12-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 

Sec. 12-40. - Defacing of official signs, notices, etc. 
No person shall deface, obliterate, remove, take down, disturb, or in any other manner interfere with any sign bearing the name of any street or public place, or any bulletin board, or sign or notice erected, posted, or placed by the authority of the city council or any officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-41. - Alarm systems. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Alarm system. Any assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into a premise or to signal an attempted robbery at a protected premise, and with respect to such signal a public safety officer is expected to respond. 
(2)  False alarm. The activation of a burglary or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary or robbery is taking place on the premises. 
(3)  Premises. Any dwelling, business or public establishment, or, where more than one such dwelling, business or public establishment is situated in a common development, "premises" means the entire such development. 
(4)  Telephonic alarm system. Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to operate automatically through the use of telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message or warning to another location. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It is unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery or burglary alarm for the purpose of summoning a police officer except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a person to notify a police officer of an activated alarm when he or she knows that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system, or was apparently caused by maintenance or service of the alarm system, without notifying the police officer of such apparent malfunction or repair. 
(c)  Fees. For a police officer's response to any false alarm, the director of public safety shall charge and collect from the person or business having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery alarm system on the premises owned and occupied by him or her, fees as follows: 
(1)  For a first response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year period, no fee shall be charged, but the person having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery alarm shall, within three (3) working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the director of public safety on forms prescribed by him or her setting forth cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the director of public safety may require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary. 
(2)  For a second response to premises after a first response within a calendar year period, a fifteen-dollar ($15.00) fee shall be charged and paid within ten (10) days' of notice and same, and a written report shall be required as for a first response and the director of public safety shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises and to prescribe necessary corrective action. 
(3)  For a third response to premises after a second response within a calendar year, a twenty-dollar ($20.00) fee shall be charged and paid within ten (10) days' notice of same, and a written report shall be required as for a first response and the director of public safety shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person or business having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this section, including the fee requirements for four (4) or more false alarm responses by the police within each calendar year. 
(4)  After a fourth response to premises within a calendar year, and for all succeeding responses within that calendar year, a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) fee shall be charged and paid within ten (10) days' notice of same, and if such false alarms are as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the director of public safety, the director of public safety may order the disconnection of such alarm system and it shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until such corrective action is taken, provided that no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. 
(d)  User fees. Any person or business which maintains an alarm system which has a direct connection to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of DeKalb County Department of Public Safety shall be charged a monthly fee for said connection, in an amount as established by DeKalb County ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-42. - False reports. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly and willfully harass or attempt to harass or mislead any police officer, other law enforcer, or authorized emergency response entity or person by submitting false or misleading information or unauthorized use of any telecommunication device of whatever nature to summon police aid without reasonable cause. 
(2)  On the first offense, the person or persons shall receive a warning. On the second and all subsequent offenses, the person or persons shall be subject to fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-43. - Refusal to obey official request. 
For the prupose of promoting the safety and welfare of the public it shall be unlawful for a person in a gathering to refuse to obey the reasonable official request or order of a peace officer to move by dispersing those gathered. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-44. - Giving false name, address, or birthdate to law enforcement officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to give a false name, address, or date of birth to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birthdate. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-45. - Sale of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell more than four (4) vehicles per year within the City of Clarkston without first obtaining the necessary city, state, and federal licenses and permits. Any person without such license or permit who sells four (4) or less vehicles within the City shall sell only vehicles titled in his name and located on his own property. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 288, § 1, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 296, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Secs. 12-46—12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH 

Sec. 12-50. - Sale of unwholesome food products. 
The selling or offering for sale, for food, by any peddler or other person in the city, of unsound or unwholesome vegetables, fruits, meats, eggs, fish, rancid butter, or any other unsound or unwholesome food product, shall cause the person so offending to be punished upon conviction thereof, as provided in section 1-7. The offending person shall forfeit his license upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-51. - Pharmaceuticals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give free samples of proprietary or patent medicines to any person, except that a pharmaceutical sales representative may give free samples of proprietary or patent medicines to a medical professional while all parties involved are acting in the course and scope of their professional duties. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-52. - Waste and disposal thereof. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any slops, garbage, or filth of any kind into any street, or other public or private place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon the streets or other public places, or on private property without the consent of the owner, except at such places as may be properly designated by the city, any glass, broken ware, dirt, paper, rubbish, garbage, or filth or any kind. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to set on fire any leaves, rubbish, or trash of any kind anywhere within the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit offal or dead animals at any place within the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any gutter or spout so as to convey filth from kitchens or elsewhere into any street of the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks, or gutters as a means of drainage to carry off any used and dirty water or other filthy fluids. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, fluid, or liquid substance so as to injuriously affect the surface of any city street or sidewalk so as to make it unsafe for travel. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to allow waste water from washing cars or from other sources to run across the sideawalk, and such person shall provide an adequate means of disposal thereof. Operations of filling stations may not wash their premises between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks into the streets. Such litter shall be deposited in a proper receptacle which shall be covered to prevent scattering by wind and animal. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport for any distance any dirt, soil, sand, rubbish or other material, over or upon or in the streets of the city, in any wagon, cart, wheelbarrow, truck, or other vehicle from which such dirt, soil, sand, rubbish, or any like substance escapes or leaks. 
For the purposes of this section, every tenant or occupant of a house or other premises, opposite or nearest to which such garbage, slops or filth may be found, shall be presumed to be the offender. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 388, § 3, adopted June 2, 2015 , repealed former § 12-53 in its entirety which pertained to the prohibition of weeds, junk and trash and derived from Ord. No. 280, § 1, adopted March 2, 2004. 
Sec. 12-54. - Restraint of animals while off of owner's property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, or any person having custody or control of any animal, to keep the animal under restraint at all times while the animal is off of the real property limits of such owner or person having custody or control of the animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors, or is in charge of any animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any street, right-of-way, or upon public or private property unless such property belongs to said person. It shall be the duty of any person who having custody or control of any animal, while not on their own property, to have in their possession a device, equipment, or other means for picking up and removal of animal excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal when in police or rescue activities. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 3-2-04) 
Sec. 12-55. - Animal regulation in Armistead and Milam Parks. 
For the health and safety of children and others who use city parks for recreational purposes, it shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or be in charge of a restrained or unrestrained animal, with the exception of seeing eye dogs for disabled persons, within areas of Armistead Park or Milam park which are primarily for the use of children or for athletic practices and events and where such areas are designated by signs which indicate that animals are not allowed. Violations of this section are punishable pursuant to the provisions of section 3.06 of the Charter and section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Acquisition of parks, § 1.03(j). 
Cross reference— Animal regulation in Armstead and Milam Parks, § 12-55. 
State Law reference— Parks, playgrounds and recreation centers, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Closing hours of parks. 
City parks shall be closed to all public use during such hours and on such days as shall be prescribed from time to time by the parks committee of the city council; provided, however, that such hours and days be posted on a sign at each entrance to said parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any park during hours posted as being closed hours; provided however, notice of possible fine and imprisonment shall be posted on a sign at each entrance of the park. 
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 1, 2, 4-2-79) 
Sec. 13-2. - Alcoholic beverages: Drinking or possession in parks. 
It shall be unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages or possess containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon park areas within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 156, 5-1-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 156, adopted May 1, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 13-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 13-3. - Restriction on the use of certain athletic parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of twelve (12) years to use the athletic field in Milam Park in the city which lies contiguous to Norman Road for the purpose of playing baseball or softball. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, one shall be considered as playing baseball or softball if he is a participant on a team which is playing or practicing baseball or softball on said field or if he strikes a baseball or softball with a bat while located on that field or throws a baseball or softball on that field; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall preclude any person who is acting as a coach for children twelve (12) years old and under to participate in coaching drills with such children. 
(c)  The city shall post signs at the subject field to inform the public of the restrictions as set forth in this section. 
(d)  Any person who shall be in violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 167, § 1, 8-6-91) 
Sec. 13-4. - Outdoor lighting. 
(a)  In order to provide for the peace, tranquility and general convenience of the citizens of Clarkston, all lighted outdoor events or activities where the lighted area exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet must cease no later than 8:30 p.m., local time, and all such lighting shall be extinguished at that time. It shall be the affirmative duty of the owner or lessee of such property to comply with the provisions of this section. To violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed unlawful conduct subject to the penalties and punishment provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the tennis courts in Milam Park, a city owned and operated facility, nor shall it apply to security lighting, public or private, which is left on from sundown to sunup. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 1, 7-2-02) 
Sec. 13-5. - Use of city property for golf practice, putting greens, or driving ranges. 
No person shall use any park or other area owned and operated the City of Clarkston for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, a putting green, or driving range. Violations of this ordinance are punishable pursuant to the provisions of section 3.06 of the charter and section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 304, § 1, 4-4-06) 
Chapter 14 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 363, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2011, repealed former Ch. 14, Arts. I—IX, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 281, § 1, adopted Apr. 6, 2004; Ord. No. 332, §§ 1—4, adopted Feb. 3, 2009. 
Charter reference— Officers and employees, § 3.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority as to employees, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 36-35-4. 

Sec. 14-1. - City manager as director of personnel. 
The city manager shall have the authority to direct and administer the operation of all departments of City Government so long as said administration is consistent with applicable state and federal laws as well as the City Charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 14-2. - City clerk as assistant administrator of human resources. 
Separate and distinct from the city clerk's duties under the Charter, the city clerk shall serve as assistant administrator of human resources and shall administer all human resources functions of the city government under the direction of the city manager. The city clerk shall maintain personnel records for city employees in a manner consistent with state and federal law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 14-3. - Department heads. 
The chief of police, finance officer, and director of public works shall be considered "department heads" for the purpose of administering city government. All department heads shall be directly supervised by the city manager and shall supervise their department pursuant to the direction of the city manager. In the absence of any department head, the city manager shall serve as the head of such department. Department heads serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 14-4. - Anti-discrimination policy. 
It is the policy of the city that all employees are entitled to a work environment free from all forms of discrimination including sexual harassment. No employee of the city shall be discriminated against in promotion, discipline, pay, or any other conditions of employment based on sex, race, age, religion, national origin, citizenship, political affiliation, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other characteristic that is protected by law. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 14-5. - Merit system. 
Hiring, firing, and other terms of employment with the City of Clarkston shall be governed exclusively by merit. Employees of the city that have successfully completed a probationary period may only be subjected to a substantial adverse employment action, such as demotion or termination, for cause. However, the city manager shall also have the authority to make necessary lay-offs or reductions in work hours when a lack of work or budget constraints necessitate such action. The city manager shall promulgate rules for employee discipline and an appeal procedure that includes due process for non-probationary employees. An employee that is dissatisfied with an appeal pursuant to the procedure established by the city manager shall have certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County as his exclusive remedy. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Sec. 14-6. - Employee handbook. 
The city manager shall promulgate an employee handbook and shall distribute the same to every employee of the City of Clarkston. The employee handbook shall set forth the key policies, goals, benefits and expectations of employment with the city. The content of the employee handbook shall be determined by the city manager, so long as it is consistent with the terms of the City Charter and Code of Ordinances, as well as applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, 10-4-11) 
Chapter 15 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 355, § 1, adopted March 1, 2011, repealed former Ch. 15 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 2-12—2-18, and the following: 

 

 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A; subdivisions, Ch. 17. 

Sec. 15-1. - Planning and zoning board—Established. 
The city planning and zoning board is hereby created and established. Any reference in this Code, including appendix A regarding zoning, to the "planning and development commission" or the "zoning and review commission" shall henceforth be deemed to refer to the planning and zoning board hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 15-2. - Same—Membership. 
(a)  Composition; appointment and terms. The planning and zoning board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Members shall be appointed to overlapping terms of four (4) years and shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. All members shall be persons who hold no other public office in the municipality. 
(b)  Filling vacancies; removal of members. Any vacancy in membership in the planning and zoning board shall be filled for the unexpired term by a person or persons nominated by the mayor and approved by vote of the city council. 
(c)  Compensation. Each member of the planning and zoning board shall receive as compensation ten dollars ($10.00) per diem while engaged upon attendance at regular meetings of the commission. No compensation need be paid for attendance at called meetings. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 15-3. - Same—Organization; rules of procedure; meetings; records. 
The planning and zoning board shall elect its chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning and zoning board shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting; provided, such planning and zoning board shall meet at least once each month. All meetings of the planning and zoning board at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning and zoning board shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Employees and staff; expenditures. 
The planning and zoning board may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning commission, city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning and zoning board shall be limited to the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board shall advise the city clerk as needed concerning business license applications as set forth in chapter 11; 
(b)  The planning and zoning board shall review applications for sign permits as set forth in chapter 15.5; 
(c)  The planning and zoning board shall review applications for the subdivision of land as set forth in chapter 17; 
(d)  The planning and zoning board shall review applications for rezoning, variance, and other land use matters as set forth in appendix A; 
(e)  The planning and zoning board shall perform such other functions as required by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Secs. 15-6—15-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 15-10. - City planner—Designation. 
From time to time, the city council may deem it beneficial to the city to designate a qualified individual with expertise in the areas of zoning, land use, and planning as the "city planner" by resolution. The designated city planner shall review applications and prepare recommendations regarding zoning, subdivision, land disturbance, and other development technical reviews, and shall perform such other duties and responsibilities assigned to the city planner by this Code under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Chapter 15.5 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 379, §§ 1, 2(attach.), repealed former Ch. 15.5, §§ 15.5.1—15.5-24, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 337, § 2, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 348, § 1, 11-2-10; Ord. No. 356, §§ 1, 3, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 370, §§ 1—12, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 376, §§ 12, 13, 12-3-13 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15.5-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The purpose and intent of the governing authority of the city in enacting this chapter is related to the following objectives: 
(1)  To enact regulations which promote signs that are subordinate to and in aesthetic harmony with their location on buildings and their surrounding environment; to identify requirements that safeguard life, public health, aesthetic quality and welfare by regulating the location, size, number, illumination, construction, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs and outdoor advertising structures and to eliminate visual clutter and blight within the city. 
(2)  To promote the safety of persons and property by ensuring that signs do not create traffic or other hazards due to collapse, fire, visual obstruction, decay or abandonment. 
(3)  To protect property values by regulating excessive visual clutter and ensuring that signage is constructed of quality materials and is well-maintained. 
(4)  To balance the right of individuals to convey their message with the duty to provide an uncluttered and aesthetic public realm for all members of the community. 
(5)  To provide for fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter throughout the city. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 1), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; and words in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
The phrase "use for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for," and the word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
Words not defined herein shall be construed as having the meaning as defined in the Merriam-Webster English Dictionary, 2004 edition. 
Abandoned sign: A permitted sign or sign structure which was erected in conjunction with a particular use which has been discontinued for a period of at least one hundred eighty (180) days. This excludes temporary periods of remodeling, refurbishment or maintenance of the sign, or temporary vacancy of the property/business where the sign is located. 
Aggregate sign area: The area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six (6) hours is not considered an animated sign. However, any deviation from the minimum six (6) hour change of unchanged copy results in the sign being considered an animated sign. LED signs are considered separately from animated signs. 
Architectural embellishment: Any modification of a building or attached structures to cause additional notification of the building or advertise the business, including but not limited to enlarged architectural features or projections to the building. Note that linear lighting is considered separately. 
Area of a sign/sign area: The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Attached sign: Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by, any part of a building (such as a roof, wall, canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) which encloses or covers usable space. Banners and window signs shall not be included in this definition for the purposes of this chapter. 
Awning sign: A sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner: Any sign, with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornaments, applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind, with only such material for a backing. 
Billboard sign: Any sign with a sign area exceeding 300 square feet. 
Building façade: The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or waves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes, and which may also be referred to as the building face. 
Channel letters: A type of building signage using separate three-dimensional letters that project from the building. 
Changeable copy sign: A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
Copy area: The area of a sign that displays a message, symbol or emblem, and is exclusive of the base, apron, supports, and other structural members of the sign. 
Combined sign area: See "aggregate sign area." 
Directional sign: A sign containing information relative to the location, distance to, entrance to, and exit from structures or land use activities. 
Double-faced sign: A sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Feather flag sign: A sign in the shape of a feather or banana that is a part of, or attached to, a pole. 
Flag: Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
Freestanding sign: A sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or pole signs. 
Hoist: The half or edge of a flag nearest to the flagpole. 
Illuminated sign: A sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
LED sign: An electronically controlled sign utilizing light-emitting diodes to form a message. 
Linear lighting: Any linear lighting around windows (either inside or outside the window), building facades, rooflines, doors, signs, and other building structures, or building projections. Linear lighting may include neon tubes, rope lighting, or any source of the lighting that creates the same effect. Linear lighting is not considered a sign for the purposes of this ordinance. Displays that use linear type lighting to create letters or shapes distinct from those described above are considered signs. 
Marquee sign: A projecting sign attached to a roofed structure of a building which may project over sidewalks. This definition shall include any hood or stationary awning or permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare. 
Monument sign: A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. No open spaces which allow a direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other are permitted in the area beneath the highest point of the sign face. 
Non-conforming sign: Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter that was legal at the time of its erection. 
Non-residential district: Any parcel which is part of the Clarkston districts RC, NC-1, NC-2, TC, or I. 
Parcel: A separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind as a means of attracting attention. May also be several small flags connected to a single line. See "spectacular signs." 
Permanent sign: Any sign attached securely to a building, roof, wall, or canopy or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces or treated wood and continuing in the same state or without essential change to the sign structure. 
Planned center: A group of two (2) or more retail stores, service establishments, offices, industrial buildings, or any other businesses, or combination thereof, consisting of individual buildings or units which are adjacent or abutting one another, and which are planned to serve the public, and which share common amenities or common area, sidewalks, parking areas or driveways, excepting outparcels. 
Pole sign: A freestanding sign mounted on one or more poles or pylons set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles or pylons. 
Portable sign: A mobile, temporary, or non-electrical sign that is mounted on a structure, with or without wheels or skids, and not permanently attached to the ground. 
Projecting sign: A sign which is attached to a building wall and which extends at a ninety-degree angle from the face of the building, from the face of such wall. Horizontal projecting sign means any sign which is greater in width than in height. Vertical projecting sign means any sign which is greater in height than in width. 
Public art: Any special landscape treatment or work of art as ultimately arbitrated by the city council; public art is not considered a sign for the purpose of this chapter. 
Pylon sign: See "pole sign." 
Residential district: Any parcel which is part of the Clarkston districts NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, or NR-CD. 
Roof sign: A sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. 
Sign: A device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. The following are not considered signs for the purposes of this chapter: public art, signs bearing only property or post office box numbers, and signs bearing the names of the occupants of the premises. 
Sign area: The entire face of a sign and all wall work including illuminated tubing incidental to its decoration. In the case of an open sign made up of individual letters, figures, or designs attached directly to the building or standard, the space between such letters, figures, or designs shall be included as part of the sign area. 
Snipe sign: A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, posts, poles, stakes, fences, rocks, or to other objects not authorized as part of the sign. 
Spectacular sign or device: Animated signs, feather flags, streamers, pennants, balloons and other air or gas filled devices, search lights, lasers, beacons, or other light projecting devices. 
Streamers: See "PENNANT." 
Temporary sign: Any sign used to announce the occasion of a special event, announces the occurrence of a temporal event or activity, which will only be displayed for the duration of the event, or a reasonable time as determined by the planning and zoning board. 
Vehicular sign: Any sign on a vehicle moving above the ground or any vehicle parked temporarily, secondary to its principle use for transportation. This definition shall not include signs which are being transported to a site of erection, identification signs on commercial vehicles which are used regularly for conducting business, nor does it include signs, lights, or signals used by any authorized emergency vehicle. 
Wall sign: A sign fastened or placed upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. Wall signs as regulated by this chapter shall include all flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or side wall of any building or structure. 
Window sign: A sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 2), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-3. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Every outdoor sign, for which a permit is required, shall be plainly marked with a decal of approval including the permit number issued for the sign or other method of identification as approved by the city. The decal of approval shall be affixed at a location appropriate to the sign, type, location and size. 
(c)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this chapter may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 3), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-4. - Illumination. 
(a)  Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjacent property or shine in a way as to cause distraction to nearby traffic. 
(b)  Illumination must be constant and may not change, flash, scroll, or simulate movement. LED lit signs are not considered illumination. 
(c)  Internal Illumination of signs is limited to channel letters only. 
(d)  Illumination provided must be a white color (either cool or warm) and may not be any other discernible color. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 4), 9-2-14 ) 
Secs. 15.5-5—15.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITTING AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 15.5-21. - Sign permits. 
(a)  All signs, except for those specifically exempted from obtaining a permit by this chapter, require a permit issued by the city before any sign may be displayed, significantly changed, or erected in the city. 
(b)  All existing signs which would be required to obtain a permit under this chapter must register with the city within (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. Registration of existing signs shall follow the same procedure as permit applications, as described in section 15.5-23; however no permit fee is required for registration. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 5), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-22. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
(a)  The following sign types shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article and do not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 15.5-62: 
(1)  Any sign erected by a public officer arising out of the performance of his/her duties is exempt from the permit requirement. These signs include, but are not limited, to the following: safety signs or notices, danger signs, traffic signs and control devices, memorial plaques, historical markers, street signs, etc. 
(2)  Two (2) freestanding signs per parcel, so long as such sign(s) are less than five (5) feet tall each and not more than six (6) square feet each in area. 
(3)  Numbers displayed for purposes of identifying property address, not to exceed four (4) inches in height in residential districts and ten (10) inches in height in non-residential districts. 
(4)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are displayed for a maximum period of thirty days no more than twice a year. 
(b)  Flags. Every parcel may display no more than three (3) flags that shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 15.5-62 without obtaining a permit. Flags must comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Flagpoles shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. 
(2)  The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(3)  Flags shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
(4)  On officially designated city, county, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum size or number or other limitations on flag display. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 6), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-23. - Sign permit application information. 
(a)  Official sign permit applications shall be provided by the city and filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the city. The application asks for all materials needed to verify that the signs in question meet all the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Additional material may be requested by the planning and zoning board to ensure that the proposed sign will conform to this chapter and other chapters of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 7), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-24. - Fees. 
Payment of a sign permit fee shall be required to obtain a permit. The amount of such fee shall be established in a fee schedule as approved by resolution of the council. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 8), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-25. - Time for consideration of sign permit. 
(a)  The city shall process all sign permit applications within ninety (90) business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and associated sign permit fee. 
(b)  The city shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city in writing on or before the ninetieth business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. 
(c)  If the planning and zoning board requests additional information as set forth in subsection 15.5-23(b) within forty-five (45) days of the applicant submitting his application and required fee, then the application will not be considered complete until such information is submitted. 
(d)  If the city fails to act within ninety (90) business days of the receipt of completed application and applicable sign permit fee, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 9), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-26. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure: 
(1)  The planning and zoning board shall approve or deny sign permits within the city. 
(2)  No permits shall be denied or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause" is the violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing any false material statements. 
(3)  Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a sign permit. 
(4)  The city will revoke a sign permit if it determines that a sign permit was issued based on an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter. 
(5)  Should the planning and zoning board deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and delivered by hand to the applicant or mailed by first class mail to the address provided by the applicant on or before the ninetieth business day after the city's receipt of the application and corresponding fee. 
(6)  For any application which is denied and subsequently resubmitted, the resubmittal date shall serve as the date of submission not the date of the original denied submission. 
(b)  Appeal: 
(1)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or an individual whose permit has been revoked has the right to appeal the decision to the city council. A written notice of an appeal must be filed with the city within fifteen (15) calendar days of the planning and zoning board's decision. 
(2)  The appeal shall be considered by the council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided the notice of appeal is received a minimum of five (5) full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at said meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular council meeting. 
(3)  The council shall make a final decision no later than forty-five (45) days following the submission of the notice of appeal. 
(c)  Any applicant whose permit has been denied or revoked and is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council may petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County as provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 10), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-27. - Permit expiration. 
(a)  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been erected in accordance with the permit application within six (6) months after the date of issuance. 
(b)  Permit fees will not be refunded for permits which expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign in the allotted time. 
(c)  Individuals whose original permit expired but who wish to erect a sign at the same location must file a new application and pay the applicable fee. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 11), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-28. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. 
(b)  The city may inspect any sign regulated by this chapter or other ordinances to ensure that such sign conforms to this chapter and all other ordinances of the city. Such inspection may be made at any time deemed necessary by the city, so long as the inspection does not violate the protections afforded by the United States Constitution, and is performed in a lawful manner. 
(c)  If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances, the city shall have the power to provide written notice of the violation to the sign owner, the owner of the property on which the sign is located or both. This notice shall include a brief statement of the particulars in which this chapter or other ordinances are violated and the manner in which such a violation is to be remedied. 
(1)  If a sign has been registered with the city, written notice to the registered owner or the person or firm receiving the permit shall be sufficient. 
(2)  If a sign owner cannot be found, the property owner upon whose property the sign is attached will be given written notice of the violation and will be required to perform corrections or removal of the sign will be upon the property owner on whose property the sign is attached. 
(3)  If the city makes a reasonable effort and cannot locate the sign owner or the property owner, then affixing a copy of the notice to the sign, sign structure, or building for a period of ten (10) days shall be sufficient notice to property owner and/or sign owner. 
(d)  Once notice has been given to either the sign owner or the owner of the property where the sign is located, the sign shall be remedied in accordance with the statement provided by the city, or removed. Permanent signs are allotted a period of thirty (30) days, and portable signs a period of twenty-four (24) hours to be remedied or removed. 
(e)  If such violation is not remedied within the specified time, after notice of violation, the sign will be removed by the sign owner, the property owner, or the city. If the city removes the sign, it will be done at the sign owner or property owner's expense, or where appropriate, both. Such expense may be recouped by placing a lien on the subject property in the amount of expenses incurred by the city. 
(f)  The sign owner or property owner, or where appropriate, both, will be fined for each day of continued violation before the sign is removed. No notice of violation is required before the city issues citations. The fine will not exceed the maximum amount authorized by this Code. 
(g)  Any sign that poses an imminent threat to public safety may be immediately removed, without notice to the owner. 
(h)  In order to enforce the requirements of this chapter, the city shall have the rights and obligations provided by state law regarding access to private property and inspections including the right to obtain an inspection warrant should access be denied. 
(i)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 3.06 of the City Charter and section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation, and each day of continued violation for each sign shall be considered a separate offense. 
(j)  The city may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other city ordinance, but a court order shall not be required for the city to exercise its enforcement rights pursuant to this section. 
(k)  The city may remove any sign or structure illegally placed upon a public right-of-way without notice and may dispose of said sign or structure as deemed proper and expedient. Such removal and disposal of illegally placed signs shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for illegally placing such signs in the public right-of-way. 
(l)  The city is authorized to remove any illegal sign and to place a lien for the removal cost upon the real property upon which the sign was located prior to the removal. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 12), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-29. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances are limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome a hardship. In no circumstance should a variance allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed under the provisions of this chapter. Nor should a variance allow a sign which is prohibited in this chapter. 
(b)  A variance from the sign regulations may only be granted where the applicant establishes that a hardship exists which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Where the visibility of an otherwise conforming sign from the closest public street would be materially impaired by existing vegetation, natural features, structures, or existing signs on another lot; and 
(2)  Placement of the sign in another location on the site would not remedy the visual impediment; and 
(3)  The proposed variance would not create a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic; and 
(4)  The visibility impediment is not created by the owner of the subject property. 
(c)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the city for council consideration and shall be heard in the same time frame and rules governing appeals under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 13), 9-2-14 ) 
Secs. 15.5-30—15.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 15.5-41. - Prohibited locations and methods of erection. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in the locations and circumstances described below: 
(1)  LED signs except within monument signs or window signs in non-residential areas or electronic billboards where expressly permitted; 
(2)  Permanent detached and attached signs that are not designed to conform to the city-adopted building code for wind pressures, and constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building codes or other ordinances of the City of Clarkston; 
(3)  Signs that are within public rights-of-way or utility easements, with the exception of publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(4)  Signs placed on another person's property without that person's express consent; 
(5)  Signs placed within the Railroad right of way; 
(6)  Signs that obstruct any door, window, fire escape, fire or emergency exit, or ventilation system; 
(7)  Signs which interfere with road visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 14), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-42. - Prohibited signs types. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs; 
(2)  Pole signs; 
(3)  Snipe signs; 
(4)  Portable signs; 
(5)  Abandoned signs; 
(6)  Vehicular Signs; 
(7)  Animated Signs; 
(8)  Signs which advertise any illegal activity under the laws of the city, the State of Georgia, or otherwise prohibited under federal law; 
(9)  Signs which pose a hazard to surrounding property or individuals; 
(10)  Signs that use flashing or blinking lights; 
(11)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-12-80; 
(12)  Signs which simulate traffic control or warning signs or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal, or public service sign; 
(13)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any public road by a person of normal hearing; 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 15), 9-2-14 ) 
Secs. 15.5-43—15.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 15.5-51. - General signage in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed below, parcels located in residential zoning districts are restricted to a combined sign area of fifteen (15) square feet and are forbidden from being illuminated externally or internally. 
(b)  No individual sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign area in a residential zoning district. 
(c)  Signs in residential districts are restricted in height to no greater than five (5) feet higher than the center line of the adjacent streets. 
(d)  Residential signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements and fees. 
(e)  Holiday displays as permitted in subsection 15.5-22(a). 
(f)  Flags as permitted in subsection 15.5-22(b). 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 16), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-52. - Subdivision entrance signs. 
(a)  Residential subdivisions including multi-family housing consisting of more than two (2) parcels may erect one (1) monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. 
(b)  Entrance signs shall be limited to a height of five (5) feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street. The sign shall have a sign area less than twenty five (25) square feet. 
(c)  Entrance signs must be twelve (12) feet away from the curb. 
(d)  Entrance signs may be externally illuminated. 
(e)  Entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on an individual residential parcel. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 17), 9-2-14 ) 
Secs. 15.5-53—15.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGNS ALLOWED IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 15.5-61. - Size and location requirements in non-residential districts. 
(a)  No freestanding sign shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of two public streets. 
(b)  Height measurement: All sign heights in non-residential zoning districts shall be measured from the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. If the property is higher than the level of the street, the ground level at the base of the proposed sign shall be used. Corner lots shall use the higher of the adjacent street levels. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(c)  In planned centers all signs shall be uniform in location, size, and color of lettering and shall be constructed of non-combustible material. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 18), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-62. - Maximum combined sign area per parcel. 
Parcels may contain more than one (1) freestanding sign, given the following: 
(a)  Parcels exceeding sixty thousand (60,000) square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of two hundred (200) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(b)  Parcels less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet but greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one hundred (100) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(c)  Parcels less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of fifty (50) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(d)  The limits set forth in (a), (b) and (c) of this section are assessed against the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel but do not count the area of window, wall, awning, billboard, or projecting signs located on the parcel. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 19), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-63. - Billboard signs. 
(a)  Billboard signs shall not exceed six hundred and seventy two (672) square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height or forty eight (48) feet in length. 
(b)  Billboard signs are only permitted on parcels zoned RC, NC-1, NC-2, TC, or I. 
(c)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to US Highway 78 or Interstate 285 and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
(d)  Electronic billboards must meet all standards set by Georgia Department of Transportation for that type of signage. 
(e)  No billboard sign shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another billboard sign. 
(f)  No billboard sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(g)  No billboard structure shall exceed a height of fifty (50) feet. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 20), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-64. - Monument signs. 
(a)  Monument signs for planned centers are limited to one hundred (100) square feet of total area, which includes both signage and structure, and shall be limited to one (1) such sign per parcel per street frontage and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. No more than eight (8) distinct signs may be located on a single planned center monument sign. 
(b)  Monument signs for single tenant parcels are limited to eighty (80) square feet of total area, which includes both signage and structure, shall be limited to one (1) such sign per parcel per street frontage and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(c)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the sign face of a monument sign may be changeable copy. 
(d)  LED signs are permitted within monument signs provided they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Occupy no more than twenty (20) percent of the sign façade. 
(2)  Not flash or simulate movement. 
(3)  Not change more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
(4)  Not exceed brightness of more than two-tenths (0.20) foot-candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at a distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(e)  Monument signs shall be constructed of durable materials such as brick, stone, corrosion-resistant metal, wood, and stucco or other similar materials as approved by the planning and zoning board. Materials and colors should match those used on the primary structure. Wood shall only be used if it meets all the following criteria: 
(1)  The wood portion of the sign must be created using a sand-blasting or carving technique. 
(2)  The wood must be painted to protect it from moisture, and kept in an orderly appearance. 
(3)  The wood shall not be in contact with the ground. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 21), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-65. - Wall and awning signs. 
(a)  Wall and awning signs shall not extend above the parapet wall. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than eighteen (18) inches. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than five (5) feet. 
(c)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the wall face to which the sign is attached or three hundred (300) feet of total sign area, whichever is less. For individual tenant spaces that are connected to a larger multi-tenant building, only the wall area of the tenant space is counted. 
(d)  The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be ten (10) feet. 
(e)  Wall signs are only permitted on parcels zoned RC, NC-1, NC-2, TC, or I. 
(f)  Wall signs must be constructed of non-combustible materials, plastic must have a matte or non-glossy appearance. 
(g)  Neon signs are permitted as wall signs, but are limited to twenty (20) square feet in total area. Any tube lighting signage shall be deemed a "neon sign" for purposes of this section. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 22), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-66. - Projecting signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs, including the frames, braces, and supports thereof, shall be designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer, and shall be approved by the building inspector as in compliance with the building code of the city, and shall be constructed of incombustible materials. 
(b)  Movable parts. Any movable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service opening shall be securely fastened by chains, screws, or hinges. 
(c)  Size limitations. Except by special permission of the planning and zoning board, projecting signs shall be limited to five (5) percent of the building face but no larger than fifty (50) square feet on each side. No projecting sign shall be less than twelve (12) inches wide. 
(d)  Location. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten (10) feet above the ground, and a distance not greater than four (4) feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the sign nearest to the wall. No projecting sign shall be nearer to the curb line than eight (8) feet. Projecting signs shall not be erected over public driveways, alleys, or thoroughfares. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 23), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-67. - Window signs. 
(a)  Windows signs must not exceed thirty percent (30) of the window area. 
(b)  LED signs are permitted as window signs provided they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Not flash or simulate movement. 
(2)  Not change more than once every hour. 
(3)  Not exceed brightness of more than 0.20 foot-candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at a distance of 125 feet. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 24), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-68. - Architectural embellishments. 
(a)  Generally. Architectural embellishments added to a structure for the purpose of conveying a message as to the purpose of the building, or to attract attention to the building, shall be treated as signs, and must comply with the standards set forth in this ordinance. The area of architectural embellishments shall count towards wall sign totals. 
(b)  Requirements. All applications for approval of architectural embellishments shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Architectural embellishments must be consistent with the design of the building and compatible with the surrounding structures. 
(2)  No text, logos, arrows, flags, or banners shall be part of an architectural embellishment. Lighting may be considered an architectural embellishment if it meets the criteria mentioned above. 
(3)  Architectural embellishments shall be applied and constructed strictly in accordance with the plans submitted with the sign application. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 25), 9-2-14 ) 
Secs. 15.5-69—15.5-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL SIGN PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.5-81. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Applications for temporary sign permits shall be submitted to the city, along with all appropriate fees. City staff shall determine whether the requested sign conforms to the requirement of this section. 
(b)  Applications for temporary sign permits shall be submitted no less than twenty (20) days prior to the anticipated use of such sign. The city shall render its decision on any application for a temporary sign within five (5) working days of its receipt by the city or the permit shall be deemed granted. The fee for the sign shall be determined by the fee ordinance of the city. 
(c)  The applicant for a temporary sign permit should be prepared to submit any of the information required for permanent signs as listed in section 15.5-23 of this chapter should such be requested by the city, including number, dimensions and locations of existing signage on site. 
(d)  Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the city may appeal that decision to the planning and zoning board. Any such appeal shall be delivered to the city within ten (10) days of receipt of the adverse decision of the city or their designee. 
(e)  The applicant for the temporary sign permit shall be responsible for removing the signs within the time required by this chapter or by the city council. Temporary sign permits shall not be used in lieu of permits required for other signs in this chapter. No temporary sign permit is necessary for the signs exempted from the permit requirement under Section 6. 
(f)  The following signs are permitted with a temporary sign permit. 
(1)  Banners are permitted as a temporary sign if they conform to the following standards: 
a.  No banner shall exceed ten (10) percent of the building façade, but shall be no smaller than fifteen (15) square feet in total area; 
b.  Each banner must be individually attached to poles, mast arms or other appropriate structures; 
c.  No more than one (1) banner may be displayed upon any lot, parcel or suite/tenant space at any one time; 
d.  Banners may be displayed for a maximum of two (2) weeks at any given time, not to exceed six (6) weeks in any calendar year; 
e.  No banner may be displayed or used upon any lot with another temporary sign including, but not limited to, temporary detached signs and portable display signs; 
f.  If any lot displays a banner, then there shall only be one (1) window sign while the banner is on display; 
g.  All banners shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  Signs, including feather flag signs or streamers, advertising a special or weekend event, and directional signs pertaining to these events are permitted in any zoning district, provided that they conform to the following provisions: 
a.  No more than five (5) signs shall be erected which advertise or direct traffic to the event, more than forty-eight (48) hours before the event. 
b.  Signs shall be removed immediately after the event, or within forty-eight (48) hours of being erected, whichever is the shorter period. 
c.  Special event signs may be displayed for a maximum of twenty (20) days in any calendar year. 
d.  No sign shall be placed on another person's property without that property owner's express permission. 
e.  No sign shall exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
(3)  Balloons, gas-filled figures or other novelties are allowed for a period of ten (10) days or less in all zoning districts except NR-1, NR-2, and NR-3. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) per entity or individual, and shall not exceed three (3) cubic feet. No lot shall display more than two (2) such signs per calendar year. 
(4)  A maximum of two (2) temporary subdivision directional signs not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet are allowed while the project is under construction. 
(5)  A temporary detached sign is permitted in any zoning district for any property under development or construction, however the sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
(6)  No more than two (2) temporary signs shall be displayed on any lot in any zoning district at the same time. This provision applies to all signs, regardless of whether a permit is required. This provision is also subject to all other restrictions in this chapter. 
(7)  No temporary sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign face area unless otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(8)  One (1) or more temporary flags exceeding the allowed flags set forth in subsection 15.5-22(b). 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 26), 9-2-14 ) 
Sec. 15.5-82. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives the owner of the non-conforming sign or the owner's agent registers the sign with the city. The registration must contain all the requirements of new sign applications and must specify the sign is non-conforming and state the date the sign was completely installed. If original construction drawings for existing signs cannot be located, a series of color photographs may be provided. A fee is not required for the registration of a non-conforming sign; however failing to register will be considered an offense and may be penalized as any other ordinance violation. Non-conforming signs are permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration or destruction of the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
(2)  The sign is damaged to the extent that major repairs are required to repair the sign. The sign may be restored to its previous non-compliant condition provided the cost to repair the sign does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost for a new conforming sign. 
(b)  No structural repairs except those permitted by subsection (a) of this section, or change in size, shape, or design, shall be permitted except to make a non-conforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign. 
(d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs are permitted, but no changes in size or shape are permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 379, § 2(attach., § 26), 9-2-14 ) 
Chapter 16 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In order to add additional subject matter the editor has divided Ch. 16 into articles with §§ 16-1—16-15 designated as Art. I, In General. 
Charter reference— Authority as to streets and sidewalks, § 1.03(j), (k). 
Cross reference— Strewing circulars, etc., on the streets, § 10-6; burning leaves, rubbish, etc., on streets, § 10-14; gutters or spouts conveying filth into streets, etc., § 10-9; throwing of filth, slops or garbage into streets, etc., § 10-8; driving past workers on streets, § 18-15; permits for parades and processions, § 18-14; obstructing streets by trains, § 18-18; damaging streets, § 18-13; vehicles being driven on sidewalks, riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 18-6; hours excavation of streets permitted and permit therefor, § 10-16(8); streets in subdivisions, § 17-1. 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Numbering of buildings. 
(a)  All persons owning or occupying buildings in the city fronting on the various streets shall be required to obtain from the mayor or the mayor's designee a number for their respective buildings, and anyone erecting a new building shall obtain from the mayor or the mayor's designee the number for such building erected. 
(b)  For each business house or place of business occupying twenty (20) feet, a number shall be obtained, and each residence lot which is improved will require a number for every fifty (50) feet, but if more than one (1) house is on the fifty (50) feet, separate numbers for each house will be required. 
(c)  The mayor or the mayor's designee engineer shall furnish numbers as required by this section. 
(d)  All persons owning or occupying buildings in the city fronting on the various streets and alleys shall be required to display in a conspicuous place the number assigned to such owner or occupant of the property by the mayor or the mayor's designee in accordance with the centenary system. The number shall be erected by the owner or occupant within ten (10) days after being served with notice of the proper number assigned to the property. Anyone erecting a new building shall obtain from the mayor or mayor's designee the number for such building at the time the building permit is issued. The street number shall be conspicuously posted on a sign in the front of the property prior to undertaking any new construction. 
(Code 1968, § 6-10) 
Sec. 16-2. - Obstruction in streets or sidewalks—Permit required. 
No person shall put any obstruction of any kind in any public street or sidewalk in the city without special written permission of the chief of police. The chief of police shall grant no such permit except in cases of obvious necessity. The word "obstruction" shall be construed to include any trash, lumber, wood, glass, other object of any kind, or person which will interfere with the free use by the public of such street or sidewalk. The chief of police is authorized and directed to cause any unauthorized obstruction to be immediately removed upon discovery. 
(Code 1968, § 14-17) 
State Law reference— Obstructing street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 16-3. - Same—Obstruction of sidewalk; maximum time; without permission. 
No obstructions shall be placed on any sidewalks in the city for a period exceeding thirty (30) minutes without special written permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1968, § 20-3) 
Cross reference— Hauling dirt, etc., § 10-12; drainage into street, § 10-18; clean sidewalks, § 10-10; obstructing cemetery drives, § 7-13. 
Sec. 16-4. - Same—Merchants to keep produce, etc., off sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant or individual offering for sale any kind of produce, fruits or merchandise, to place the same in front of their respective places of business or premises on the sidewalks. 
(Code 1968, § 20-2) 
Sec. 16-4.1. - Same—Street sales require council permission. 
The streets, sidewalks, and alleys of the city shall not be used for the sale of any merchandise of any character. The city council may, from time to time make exception to this rule for a period of one day only. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 23(g), 12-2-74) 
Editor's note— Former §§ 11-27 and 11-40 has been renumbered as §§ 16-4.1 and 16-4.2 by the editor for purposes of classification. 
Sec. 16-4.2. - Same—Curb service of food and drink. 
It shall be unlawful for any person doing business in the city, hereinafter referred to in this section as "seller," to serve any soft drinks, ice cream or prepared foods to a customer while such customer is parked in an automobile on the street in front of or adjacent to the place of business of such seller, or for such seller or engage in what is commonly termed curb service in the dispensing of such drinks, ice cream or prepared foods. However, this prohibition shall not apply to any seller operating a food truck at a date, time and place approved in writing in advance by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1968, § 16-2; Ord. No. 390, § 1, 9-1-15 ) 
Note— See the editor's note for § 16-4.1. 
Sec. 16-5. - Same—Excavations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every contractor, plumber or other person making excavations in and upon the sidewalks or streets of the city for any purpose whatever, to first obtain a permit from the city, and after the completion of the work, to so fill and compact such excavations as to prevent the same or any portion thereof from sinking, caving, or settling in any degree, such filling and compacting to be approved by city, and restore the surface to as good condition as existed prior to the excavation being made. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of all persons making such excavations, until the excavation is pronounced safe by the city, to place thereon and keep placed and lighted thereon between dark and daylight, a sufficient number of red lanterns or torches to warn the public, and in the day to rail or otherwise protect such excavations. 
(Code 1968, § 20-7) 
Cross reference— See also §§ 16-7, 16-8, 16-9. 
Sec. 16-6. - Same—Red lights to be placed around obstructions at night. 
Whenever any contractor or other person is building or repairing buildings in the city and has material of any kind piled on the sidewalks or streets, it shall be the duty of the contractor, builder or other person, to place red lights or torches around such obstruction at night in sufficient numbers to warn pedestrians and other people on such streets. 
(Code 1968, § 20-9) 
Sec. 16-7. - Utility poles. 
No telephone company, telegraph company or electric company shall erect any poles for the construction of lines or the changing of lines on any of the streets of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1968, § 20-11) 
Charter reference— Authority to require removal, § 1.03(x). 
Sec. 16-8. - Construction and reconstruction of streets and sidewalks. 
After proper procedure, as set out in the ordinances, has been complied with and after the necessary authorization has been obtained for the opening or reconstruction of any old or new street, sidewalk or alley, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the work and construct grading, draining, paving, curbing, sidewalks or any appurtenance or structure pertaining thereto without first submitting plans and specifications in detail for such work to the city engineer and seeking approval on the type, size, dimensions and kind of materials to be used in such construction and the grades and elevations of such new or old construction or reconstruction. The city engineer may withhold such approval until the constructing party has met the minimum requirements of the standard specifications of the city, in use at the time, relating to such construction, and may enter upon the work during the construction thereof to see that the requirements of the city are fully complied with. 
(Code 1968, § 20-8) 
Charter reference— Authority as to street improvements, §§ 1.03(u), 4.11. 
Cross reference— As to excavations, see § 16-5. 
Sec. 16-9. - Driveway requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to construct or cause to have constructed a driveway entering upon a city street without first obtaining a permit for such work. 
(b)  When such permit is issued the owner, lessee, tenant or other constructing party shall conform to all requirements of the standard specifications of the city, in use at the time, for that portion of the driveway from the curb or gutter line to the property line and such constructing party shall conform to all grades established and other special requirements as may be set out at the time by the city engineer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to maintain, within the city, any driveway, opening onto the sidewalks or streets of the city unless such driveway is covered with chert, stone, concrete, brick, or some similar material that will prevent dirt from such property from washing on the sidewalk or street. In the event such covering does not prevent dirt from such property washing onto the sidewalk or street, the sidewalk or street at such place shall be kept free of all dirt or washings by such owner, lessee or tenant. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any such property owner, lessee or tenant to fail to remove such dirt or washings within twenty-four (24) hours after the same have been deposited upon the street or sidewalk and after the attention of such owner, lessee or tenant has been called thereto. Where a driveway is joint, all of such joint owners, lessees or tenants shall be liable for any noncompliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 20-10) 
Sec. 16-10. - Utility connections generally—Application and deposit required. 
Any person desiring to enter any street to make any utility connection or tap any main in any paved street of the city shall make an application to make such connection or tap to the city engineer or to such other official as may be designated by the mayor and shall deposit with such official the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as a guaranty for the replacement of such street in the same condition as it was prior to the making of such connection. 
(Code 1968, § 20-12) 
Sec. 16-11. - Same—Repair of streets. 
(a)  When any paved street of the city is entered by any person for making utility connections, such street shall be repaired by such person and placed in the same condition as it was prior to such entrance within five (5) days after such entrance, and if not done within such time, the city engineer shall make such repairs, deducting the cost thereof from the one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) deposited as a guaranty, and refunding to such person the amount of such deposit remaining, if any, such refunding not to be made until the expiration of thirty (30) days after such entrance. Any overage shall be paid by the person making the entrance. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the money deposited shall remain on deposit for the space of thirty (30) days after entrance into any street is made, and shall then be refunded to the depositor provided the repairs of the street have been properly made. 
(Code 1968, §§ 20-13, 20-14) 
Sec. 16-12. - Utility connection prior to street paving—Required; notice; subsequent disturbing of streets; performance of work. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of construction, when any street of the city has been ordered paved or repaved by the city to give notice to persons owning property on such street ordered paved or repaved, requiring such owners to enter into the street and make all connections required for their property with pipes, conduits, or similar service furnished either by the city or public service corporations, for water, sewer, gas, and other utility connections, before the time at which such pavement is begun, and thereafter such pavement or public improvement shall not be disturbed for the purpose of laying pipes or conduits or connecting therewith, except by special permit of the city council. 
(b)  The notice required in subsection (a) of this section shall provide for the property owner to begin work on the connections referred to in such section within five (5) days. If the work is not begun within such time, the city shall proceed to make such connections at the expense of such property owner. 
(c)  If any property owner begins work on any connections referred to in subsection (a) of this section and fails and refuses to complete such work within a reasonable time, the city shall take up such work and complete it at the expense of such property owner. 
(Code 1968, §§ 20-20—20-22) 
Sec. 16-13. - Same—Assessment of costs; issuance of execution against property owner and property. 
Should it be necessary for the city to make any of the connections referred to in section 16-12, the city clerk shall render to each property owner a bill for the cost of such improvement and if such bill is not paid within ten (10) days after receipt, the city clerk shall issue an execution against such property owner and against such property so improved for the cost of such improvement. 
(Code 1968, § 20-23) 
Sec. 16-14. - Same—Levy and sale of property. 
The executions issued under the provisions of section 16-13 shall be turned over to the chief of police who shall proceed to levy and sell the property so improved to satisfy such execution in the same manner as is provided by the charter for executions issued for street improvement and for the cost of laying sewers in the streets of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 20-24) 
Sec. 16-15. - Same—Affidavit of illegality. 
Any property owner shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality to any execution issued under the provisions of section 16-13 returnable to the superior court of the county, as provided by the charter of the city to be done in the case of executions issued for street improvements of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 20-25) 
Secs. 16-16—16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CAFÉS 

Sec. 16-21. - Sidewalk cafés—Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the authorization and regulation of sidewalk cafés as operated by qualified and licensed businesses on public sidewalks within the city. This article shall not apply to any patio or other outdoor seating area located on private property. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-22. - Sidewalk cafés—Permit and application. 
A business licensed to serve food and/or drinks may apply to the city manager for an annual permit to utilize public sidewalks abutting the business location for outdoor seating and service. Permits grant a privilege for one calendar year, or the remaining portion thereof, and are subject to annual review and renewal. The permit application shall include: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  A copy of a valid City of Clarkston business license to operate a food and/or beverage service business in front of which the sidewalk cafe will be located; 
(3)  A copy of the current certificate of insurance in the amounts and categories required by this chapter; 
(4)  A diagram identifying the perimeter of the proposed sidewalk cafe area, the dimensions of the area, the distance from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle, number and placement of tables, and the design and materials of any requested divider; and 
(5)  Payment of the annual permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-23. - Sidewalk café permits—Criteria and conditions of issuance. 
(a)  In reviewing the application for a sidewalk café, the city manager or his/her designee will consider the following criteria in determining whether a permit will be issued: 
(1)  Qualifications. Permits may only be issued incidentally with the operation of a properly licensed business. 
(2)  Location. The outdoor seating area of the sidewalk café may only extend the width of the storefront. 
(3)  Arrangement. The permit application shall include a diagram showing the location of the sidewalk café in relation to the surrounding buildings, streets, and sidewalks, along with the location of all furnishings to be placed in the sidewalk café. 
(4)  Barriers. If approved, applicants may include non-permanent barriers separating the sidewalk café from the remaining sidewalk that can be disassembled and removed if necessary. The design of the barrier if requested must be included in the permit application and shown on the diagram submitted with the permit application. If requested, the barrier should be of a simple post and chain construction, with posts of thirty-three (33) to thirty-six (36) inches in height above the surface of the sidewalk. 
(b)  The applicant must acknowledge by signature that compliance with the regulations provided for by this article are a condition of operating a sidewalk café. 
(c)  The issuance of a permit shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any estate in land to any person or business. Sidewalk café permits are a non-transferable privilege that will expire upon change in use of the facility or on December 31 of each year. 
(d)  Indemnification. As a condition of issuance, the approved applicant and any person acting under or pursuant to said approval, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, release, and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent, or groundless) to the maximum extent allowed by law, the city and its agents, officers, employees and representatives, from and against all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments, and expenses (including attorneys' fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from arise out of, or are claimed to result from or arise out of the operation, existence or approval of a sidewalk café or in any matter connected with any acts, operations, privileges authorized, allowed, or undertaken pursuant to the use of city sidewalks pursuant to this article, including, without limitation, any condition of property used as a sidewalk café. 
(e)  Insurance. The approved sidewalk cafe permittee shall be required to have general liability insurance providing for the following limits naming the city as an additional insured in the following minimum amounts: fifty thousand dollars($50,000.00) per person; and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-24. - Sidewalk café regulations. 
(a)  Limitations on location. No obstruction may be placed within two (2) feet of a curb or within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, or handicapped comer curb cut. 
(b)  Sanitation. The permittee's business shall keep the area covered by the permit clean, neat, and orderly at all times. The business is responsible for removing all debris and trash from the sidewalk café at all times. The permit holder shall keep the sidewalk cafe and the pedestrian corridor surrounding it clean of any solid waste, including, food debris, paper, cups, bottles, cans, and other garbage associated with the operation of the sidewalk cafe space on a daily basis. The public right-of-way within and adjacent to the sidewalk café must be washed down with water and detergent when needed and cleaned on a daily basis. Any stains from spills must be removed promptly by the permittee. The permittee must properly dispose of all waste and trash. 
(c)  Furnishings. Furnishings shall not be secured to lamp posts, streetlights, trees, or any public fixtures. All furnishing shall be removed from the sidewalk café from time to time as required by the city. Should a severe storm warning be issued, all outdoor furniture shall be removed from the sidewalk café. Additionally, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Tables and chairs. Tables and chairs shall match and be made of safe, sturdy, and durable material. All furniture shall be commercial grade and manufactured for outdoor use. Plastic or PVC furniture shall be prohibited. Where the nearest curb abuts on-street parking, tables shall be oriented parallel to the curb so as to allow ingress and egress between the sidewalk and the on-street parking. 
(2)  Umbrellas. Each table may be equipped with one (1) umbrella which shall be maintained in good, clean, and operable condition. Table umbrellas shall have no signs or advertisements on them,, and the lowest dimension of the umbrella shall maintain a minimum of seven (7) feet vertical clearance above the sidewalk, when extended, to allow for patron and server circulation. 
(3)  Signs. Any signs must be kept within the sidewalk café and are subject to sign permit approval. All such signs must comply with City Code. 
(4)  All kitchen equipment and refuse containers used to service the sidewalk café shall be located inside the primary business. 
(d)  Alcohol. Only a properly permitted business which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on the premises may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk café. Such service of alcohol shall be subj ect to all restrictions set out in Chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances, except as outlined below, and the following restrictions: 
(1)  Alcohol may only be served in the sidewalk café during the hours allowed under the city's ordinance for service. 
(2)  Patrons may not be in possession of more than one (1) alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  Patrons may not remove alcohol from the premises of the business or sidewalk café. The area set aside for the sidewalk café shall be considered part of the premises for the purposes of consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Sidewalk cafés permitted pursuant to this article shall not be considered "open areas," "decks" or "patios" as those terms are used in City Code section 3-22 and shall not be subject to the regulations set forth in Code section 3-22. 
(e)  Smoking. Patrons shall not be allowed to smoke within the sidewalk café. 
(f)  Sound. Music, live or recorded, or other amplified sound shall be allowed within the sidewalk café, provided it does not violate the city's ordinances related to noise. 
(g)  Hours of operation. No sidewalk café shall operate after 2:55 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday morning. No sidewalk cafe shall operate after 2:00 a.m. on any other day of the week. Permit holders shall ensure that their sidewalk cafés are not available for use after the hours specified in this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-25. - Sidewalk cafés—Permit revocation or suspension. 
Issuance of a sidewalk cafe permit is conditional. A permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designee if it is determined that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. 
(2)  The permit holder is not in compliance with any of the regulations with respect to the sidewalk café. 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to correct violations of this article or any other ordinance within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the notice of same delivered in writing to the permit holder. 
(4)  The permit holder has a history of violations of this article of three (3) or more within a two-year period, or immediately upon any violation depending upon the severity of the violation. 
(5)  Permits may be suspended for a period up to twelve (12) months depending upon history and severity of the violation. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-26. - Sidewalk cafés—Penalties for violations. 
In addition to possible suspension or revocation of the permit, the following minimum fines shall be imposed for violations of this chapter: 
(1)  First citation: One hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. 
(2)  Second citation (within one-year period): Two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine. 
(3)  Third and subsequent citations (within one-year period): Five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-27. - Sidewalk Cafés—Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Any person receiving a permit hereunder agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 16-28. - Permitted sidewalk cafés not a violation of other Provisions. 
The installation, operation or maintenance of a permitted sidewalk café shall not be construed as a violation of City Code sections 16-2 or 16-3 regarding obstructing sidewalks, nor shall a permitted sidewalk café be construed as a violation of section 16-4.1 regarding keeping or selling merchandise on the sidewalk. 
( Ord. No. 409 , § 1, 6-6-17) 
Chapter 17 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 357, § 1, adopted March 1, 2011, repealed former Ch. 17, §§ 17-1, 17-2, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 17, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 21-1, 21-2, and Ord. No. 306, § 1, adopted 5-2-06. 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning board, § 15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 17-1. - DeKalb County subdivision regulations—Adopted. 
The Subdivision Regulations of DeKalb County, Georgia, as amended through the date of adoption of this Ord. No. 357 and as currently codified as Chapter 14, Article III of the DeKalb County Code, are hereby adopted as the subdivision regulations of the city. At least one (1) copy of such subdivision regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and such regulations are the same hereby made a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 357, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 17-2. - Same—Revised. 
The following terms, where used by the DeKalb County subdivision regulations, shall have the indicated meanings for subdivisions within the city: 
Board of commissioners shall refer to the city council; 
Chapter 27 shall refer to appendix A of this Code (the city's zoning ordinance); 
Chief executive officer refer to the city manager; 
County shall refer to the City of Clarkston; 
DeKalb County comprehensive plan or comprehensive plan shall refer to the city's comprehensive plan; 
Development department, development director, and planning director shall refer to the designated city planner; 
Planning commission shall refer to the planning and zoning board; 
Recorder's court shall refer to the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 357, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 17-3. - Intent of chapter. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the review of proposed subdivisions by the city in accordance with the substantive provisions of the DeKalb County subdivision regulations using a separate procedure to be conducted by the city. Wherever the subdivision regulations call for review by a DeKalb County department, person, or entity not redefined by section 17-2, the most analogous city department, person or entity shall perform said review. In the absence of an analogous city department, person, or entity, such review shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 357, § 1, 3-1-11) 
Chapter 17.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISES AND LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 248, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2000, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 22, Arts. I and II. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of subject matter in the Code and to conform to the format of the Code, the editor has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 248 as a new Ch. 17.5 as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Cable Services Franchising, Ch. 5.5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17.5-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (a) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (b) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (c) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicants; and (d) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control of the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition other becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system mean any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Clarkston. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications systems in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five (5) percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one (1) person or group of persons. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: (a) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (b) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (c) transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications serves at or from any person or location in the city. 
May is permissive. 
Ordinance means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued on in the limited circumstances set forth in subsection 17.5-21(b) of this chapter. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, railroad right-of-way, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Telecommunications Service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 17.5-2—17.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 17.5-21. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license person pursuant to this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this chapter. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (a) may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; or (b) shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated person, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or (c) shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system this is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection (b), then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise which may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-22. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable licenses shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
d.  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city; and 
e.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems. 
(c)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(2)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
(3)  For purposes of assisting the city in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; 
(d)  If any portion of the telecommunications systems shall be built underground, the applicant shall provide the following: 
(1)  Detailed drawings of all underground work and a detailed plan for avoiding disruption of underground utilities currently existing within the streets of the city; and 
(2)  A detailed set of as-built drawings complete with a survey by a registered land surveyor showing the exact location and depth of all underground portions of the telecommunications system. 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required by the council, or by any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-23. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a non refundable application fee in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-24. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-25. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at city hall during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-26. - Evaluation criteria. 
(a)  An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the city council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(1)  The adequacy of proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any in-kind facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(b)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-27. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies at it may establish or determine appropriate, including but not limited to the planning and zoning committee, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the applications(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearings(s) in accordance with applicable law. Unless otherwise directed, the public hearing on this subject matter shall be held at or be a part of a regular meeting of the city council. If placed on the agenda of such meeting, unless otherwise required by law, it shall not be necessary to otherwise advertise such public hearing. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council shall consider the applications for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this chapter and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 17.5-26 of this chapter. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. The provisions of this section shall also apply to revocable licenses granted under circumstances described in subsection 17.5-21(b)(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-28. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable licenses. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years. 
(2)  The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license. 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both. 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or canceled. 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license. 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee. 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee. 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto. 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods. 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies. 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city. 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the city. 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license. 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission. 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license. 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license. 
(17)  Provisions to ensure that the holder of a revocable license does not change or modify the equipment in such manner to exceed the license granted. 
(18)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-29. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated person, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other person to or from any person or location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-30. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Sec. 17.5-31. - Application to existing franchisees. 
This chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems or to provide telecommunication services existing on the effective date of this chapter, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 248, § 1, 12-5-00) 
Secs. 17.5-32—17.5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DUE COMPENSATION 

Sec. 17.5-40. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of Section 46-5-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 1, 7-7-09) 
Sec. 17.5-41. - Authorized designee. 
The city clerk, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under OCGA 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the mayor and the city council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights of way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 1, 7-7-09) 
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 275, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, amended former Ch. 18, Arts. I—III, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968 and the following ordinances: 

 

 
Cross reference— Vehicle noises, § 10-20. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - State law adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, otherwise known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as traffic regulations of this city, with like effect as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-2. - General penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner, and not as a matter or right, from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified herein, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. See O.G.G.A. § 40-6-8. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-4. - Emergency regulations. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27(a)(1), in the case of an emergency or special situation, the mayor will cooperate with DeKalb County officials to implement the emergency management plan as outlined in Chapter 11 of the Code of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-5. - General parking regulations. 
(a)  There shall be no parking in excess of one (1) hour in any area of the city so designated by the city council and marked with appropriate signs. 
(b)  Parking in the roadways. 
(1)  No person shall park upon the roadway in such manner as to hinder the free flow of traffic or obstruct the approach of any emergency vehicles. 
(2)  No person shall park upon the roadway unless the vehicle so parked is facing in the direction of the flow of traffic on the side of the roadway where the car is parked. 
(3)  No person shall park a vehicle in such manner that it obstructs any driveway, intersection or traffic sign within the city. 
(4)  No person shall park a vehicle in any place where parking has been prohibited by the city council and where signs are posted designating the area as a "No Parking" area. 
(5)  No person shall park in any alleyway or access road. 
(Ord. No. 317, § 1, 12-7-06) 
Sec. 18-6. - Commercial vehicle parking regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park, store or otherwise maintain any commercial vehicle upon the premises of any commercially zoned property within the City of Clarkston unless said commercial vehicle is incidental to the business activities of the commercial property upon which it is parked or stored. 
(b)  No person or persons shall store, park or otherwise have upon any commercially zoned property within the city any commercial vehicle unless said business is licensed to conduct such commercial activity by the city, nor shall they allow or otherwise give permission to any other person or person to violate this Section. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles which are incidental to the commercial business activities of the location shall be subject to the same laws concerning abandoned or inoperable vehicles as defined in Article III of this Chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 1, 2-6-07) 
Secs. 18-7—18-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESTRICTIONS ON TYPE OF TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 18-10. - Persons propelling pushcarts to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any pushcart upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of the vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-11. - Permits required for parades and processions. 
Except for funeral processions, no procession or parade containing twenty-five (25) or more vehicles shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 376, § 14, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 18-12. - Restrictions on use of roller skates, scooters, and similar devices. 
(a)  Except for bicycles which are regulated in section 18-8, no person shall use roller skates, scooters, or any other human-powered vehicle as a means of transportation on any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any street while such street is set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(c)  There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks within the business district, but any person may so skate or ride upon the sidewalks outside the business district; provided that it shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang onto any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way interfere with the natural progress of automobiles or other vehicles along and in the streets of the city. 
(d)  No person using roller skates, scooters, or similar devices shall impede, obstruct, or otherwise interfere with pedestrian traffic. Persons so skating or riding shall give the right of way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(e)  The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-13. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business district. 
(2)  No person thirteen (13) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(3)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(b)  Acrobatic or fancy riding on streets, racing. No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street, nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle. 
(c)  Bell requirement. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable or giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(d)  Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(e)  Number of persons allowed. No more than one (1) person shall be allowed on any one bicycle. 
(f)  Rules. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter except as to special regulations in this Code and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-14. - Failure to obey summons. 
Any person who violates a notice to appear given by an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of an offense regardless of the disposition of the charge on which such person was originally arrested. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 18-15. - Motor vehicle restrictions. 
(a)  Passengers entering or leaving a vehicle. 
(1)  No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(2)  Except in emergencies, persons entering or leaving a vehicle shall do so on the side of the vehicle nearer the curb, and only when the vehicle is stopped or parked in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Use of television, radios, and similar devices. 
(1)  When any vehicle has a television, video set, or similar such device therein, it shall not be operated in view of the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(2)  When any vehicle has a radio set therein, such radio set shall not be operated at a volume great enough to prevent the driver of the vehicle from hearing horn signals of other vehicles or the warning of emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Towing. No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(d)  Damaging streets prohibited. No vehicle shall be operated on the streets with cleated wheels or so constructed in any other way as to damage the street. 
(e)  Abatement of unsafe vehicles as nuisances. The use of any vehicle on the streets is a nuisance where, by reason of a defect in such a vehicle, the driving thereof on the streets constitutes a menace or a hazard to the life, safety or property of others. 
(1)  Enforcement. The police department is charged with the duty of enforcing this section. Where it is shown that any vehicle on the street is dangerous or likely to cause injury to persons or property, the police shall cause notice to be given to the owner or other person in control of such vehicle to remove the vehicle from the streets or, if the vehicle can be made safe by repair, to repair it. 
(1)  Penalties. In the event any such person refuses to obey such notice, a summons shall be issued requiring such person to appear in the mayor's court to show cause why such vehicle should not be declared a nuisance and abated. If on the hearing the judge sees from the evidence that such vehicle is a nuisance within the meaning of this section, such judge shall enter an order so declaring and stating the terms of the abatement and the conditions under which such vehicle may be driven upon the streets. 
(f)  Speed when driving past persons working on streets. The maximum rate of speed shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour when approaching or driving past persons working in the street who are city employees or those granted permission of the city to perform specified work in the street, provided that such workers have erected a sign reading "Slow-Road Work," or such sign as may be prescribed by the city. 
(g)  Use of dim lights. The operator of a motor vehicle shall use the vehicle lights during the hours prescribed by state law in such manner as to exhibit only the dim or short-range lights while operating such vehicle within the city. 
(h)  Operation in certain areas. The operation of motor vehicles of any nature in or on any park, yard, campus, playing field, or open area of any public school, college, or institution within the city limits of the City of Clarkston, except in those areas designated by city officials for use of motorized vehicles, is hereby prohibited. 
(i)  State law adopted. 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 33, all of the provisions of title 33 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended, or as may hereafter from time to time be amended, known as the Georgia Insurance Code are hereby adopted as insurance regulations of this city, with like effect as if fully set out herein. 
(2)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 376, § 15, 12-3-13 ) 
Secs. 18-16—18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING 

Sec. 18-20. - Permit for loading or unloading. 
The mayor or the mayor's designee and chief of police are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permitee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-21. - Parking heavy vehicles at night. 
The parking of trucks having a capacity of more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) rated capacity on any street, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. for a period of more than one (1) hour, shall be prohibited, unless such truck is in the charge of an attendant awake during all hours and unless the parked truck shall be properly lighted so as to warn the operators of other vehicles of its presence. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-22. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by a sudden emergency, and in such emergency such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  For displaying advertising. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-23. - Continuous parking in same location. 
Any vehicle that shall remain parked continuously in the same location on any street in the city for the period of seventy-two (72) hours or more shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the police department as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference— Authority to remove vehicles, O.C.G.A., § 40-6-206; abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-24. - City hall parking lot. 
No person shall park in the city hall parking lot except employees and invitees of the city and then only in such places therein as designated by markings authorized by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-25. - Tractor-trailer parking. 
For the safety of motorists it shall be unlawful to park a tractor-trailer or the cab of a tractor-trailer on any public street within the city except while conducting business for pickup or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-26. - Inoperable vehicles. 
Definitions. The following vehicles shall, prima facie, be deemed inoperable: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle that does not display a valid, current license tag, registration sticker, or motor vehicle emissions sticker; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle incapable of being driven or operated; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle not covered by a valid, current insurance policy as required by state law; 
(4)  Any motor vehicle with the wheels or tires removed; and 
(5)  Any motor vehicle without a windshield. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 291, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 18-27. - Parking of inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, retain, park or keep in the City of Clarkston inoperative, wrecked or junked vehicles for more than seventy-two (72) hours after being directed to remove such vehicle by the code enforcement officer or any police officer of the city. Notice from the city to remove such inoperative vehicle shall be affixed to the vehicle in the event the owner or the person storing or keeping such vehicle cannot be determined or found and personally served with the notice. 
(b)  After expiration of the seventy-two-hour grace period described in subparagraph (a) above, each day in which the inoperative, wrecked or junked vehicle remains in the city shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense and a violation of this ordinance. Vehicles which are in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to being towed as provided in section 18-38 of this chapter. The owner or person in possession thereof shall be subject to fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 291, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 376, § 16, 12-3-13 ) 
Sec. 18-28. - Vehicle repair and maintenance work. 
Within areas of the city zoned C1, C2, C3, ROI, OI, MI, or FH, no person, corporation or other business entity shall perform or allow any other person to perform repairs or maintenance work on any vehicle on its premises unless said repair or maintenance work is performed inside an enclosed structure at a business premises holding a current business license from the city which allows the holder of said license to repair or maintain new or used vehicles. For the purposes of this section, an "enclosed structure" shall be a building which obstructs all view from the streets and surrounding properties into its enclosed area. Violation of the provisions of this section are subject to the provisions of section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances, and upon conviction may subject the holder of said business license to the provisions of section 11-6 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 18-29. - Storage of vehicles used for recreational purposes. 
No person shall park or permit any other person to park any unlicensed, unregistered, inoperable or junk vehicles which are used for recreation purpose including, but not limited to, boats, snowmobiles, personal watercraft, travel trailers, cargo trailers, campers, all-terrain vehicles and motor homes, on premises in any areas of the city zones R1, RM or ROI unless such vehicles are stored within an enclosed building. For the purposes of this Section, an enclosed building means a building with a roof, three sides constructed of either brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal, and having an operable door which will enclose the fourth wall. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Sec. 18-29.1. - Storage of machinery, implements and equipment. 
No person shall park or permit any other person to park any machinery, implements or equipment designed for use in agriculture, construction or other commercial enterprise, unless the machinery, implement or equipment is parked in an enclosed garage. This requirement does not apply to such machinery, implements or equipment that is being used in construction of structures or dwellings so long as such machinery, implements or equipment is removed after fifteen (15) days. For the purposes of this section, an enclosed garage means a structure with a roof, three sides constructed of either brick, stone, stucco or wood and having an operable door which will enclose the fourth wall. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 4-5-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 291, § 1, adopted April 5, 2005, added provisions designated as § 18-30. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has redesignated this section as § 18-29.1 
Sec. 18-29.2. - Parking vehicles on grass or in yards. 
No property owner shall park or allow any other person to park or maintain any vehicle in any yard or grassy area not otherwise designated for parking. Vehicles shall be parked in designated parking areas or driveways only. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 309, § 1, adopted June 6, 2006, added provisions designated as § 18-28. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has redesignated this section as § 18-29.2. 
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-30. - Failure to obey summons. 
Any person who violates a notice to appear given by an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of an offense regardless of the disposition of the charge on which such person was originally arrested. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-31. - Duty of police as to illegally parked vehicles; notice attached to vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing on an approved form for the driver to answer to the charge at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-32. - When summons of arrest to be issued for parking violation. 
In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to the terms of such notice directing an appearance in the mayor's court, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted, the police department shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for such person's arrest. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-33. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of such law or regulation together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(2)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in section 18-41 has been followed. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-34. - Owner liable for parking violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name to stand or park in any street in violation of this chapter or any of the ordinances of the city regulating the parking of vehicle. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and in addition thereto may have the vehicle impounded, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-35. - Records of traffic violations generally; records, etc., to be serially numbered. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged in the mayor's court of the city, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-36. - Same—Drivers' files to be maintained. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all arrests and convictions for violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances reported for each driver which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the person so arrested or convicted. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period, and from that time no such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-37. - Authority to establish vehicle pounds. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers. Such pound shall be located at such places as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-38. - When vehicle may be impounded. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department or persons designated by the chief of police by means of towing the same, or otherwise, to a vehicle pound. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-39. - Immediate record of impounding to be made. 
It shall be the duty of the officer so impounding a vehicle to immediately report the fact of such impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle to the chief of police, who shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-40. - Impounding fees, etc. 
Fees for removal, impounding and storage of vehicles shall be as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-41. - Release of impounded vehicle—Generally. 
Any person claiming any impounded vehicle shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession to the chief of police and pay to the operator of the pound the fees for removal and storage, for which a receipt shall be given. An order shall then be issued by the chief of police to the operator of the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the same to such person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the operator of the pound who shall take a receipt in duplicate for such impounded vehicle, which receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle, one (1) copy of which shall become a permanent record of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-42. - Same—When payment of fees protested. 
In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the same upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The person making such protest shall be charged with a violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for appearance and trial before the mayor's court. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(2)  If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or other traffic ordinance, in addition to other costs, the judge shall assess as costs the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-43. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
In the event any impounded vehicle is not claimed within sixty (60) days from the date it is impounded, the chief of police shall proceed to sell such vehicle as provided by law, and from the proceeds of such sale pay the accrued storage charges and pay the balance, if any, to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-44. - Pound records generally. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of the owners of such vehicles, the numbers of their state license tags and the nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 18-45. - Impounding not to preclude other prosecution. 
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Ord. No. 275, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Chapter 19 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority as to municipal utilities, § 1.03(g), (j). 
Cross reference— Permit and deposit to assure restoration of street when connecting utility, § 16-10; utility connection prior to street paving, § 16-12 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1—19-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 376, § 17, adopted Dec. 3, 2013 , repealed former Art. II, §§ 19-20—19-47, in its entirety which pertained to water. See the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume for a listing of ordinances which amended this former article. 

Secs. 19-20—19-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 185, adopted Sept. 9, 1993, repealed former Art. III, §§ 19-50—19-62, which pertained to solid waste disposal, and derived from the Code of 1968. Ord. No. 185 added new provisions designated as Art. III, In General, §§ 19-50—19-54; Art. IV, City Collection and Disposal Service, §§ 19-55—19-63; Art. V, Private Services, §§ 19-64—19-73. In order to better conform to the organization of the Code, the editor has redesignated and renumbered the provisions of Ord. No. 185 as herein set out in Art. III of this chapter. 
Charter reference— Authority as to refuse disposal, § 1.03(m). 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. 12-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle means a galvanized metal or durable plastic container of a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and not to exceed thirty-two (32) gallons, having two (2) handles on the side thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted, with a tight-fitting metal or plastic top with a handle and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. Containers shall be waterproof. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from the individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. The following general standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)  All metal containers must be steel, continuous welded and properly reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Pickup side of container shall be reinforced inside or outside at point of torque tub contact. 
(4)  Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angle. 
(5)  Bottoms shall be reinforced with one-and-one-half-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel or epoxy paint. 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be seventy (70) inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 

 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house or roominghouse with more than ten (10) dwelling units, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit and condominiums. 
Commercial/industrial refuse means waste material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. Commercial refuse also includes waste material from the construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Commercial sanitation firm means any person, other than a municipality, who collects, removes, salvages or disposes of refuse from one (1) or more public or private premises, other than the person's own whether or not under written contract, and whether or not for compensation. 
Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with the individual home appliance. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Department means the public works department or its successor for purposes of the chapter. 
Director means the public works director or the director's successor for purposes of this chapter. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided in rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the city council. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least one and one-half (1.5) mils and not exceeding a thirty-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
Rubbish means waste paper, cartons, boxes, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass crockery, dunnage and/or similar materials. 
Rubbish container means any durable watertight container such as any metal or plastic box, can or waterproof bag. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Sanitation district means the city limits of Clarkston. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Stationary compactor means an object of refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, wood, tree limbs, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 205, § 1, 11-5-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-51. - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the area under jurisdiction of the city as presently or hereafter established. It prescribes rules and regulations therefor, regulates the private collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribing rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through the city, and prohibits the deposit of litter within the city limits of the City of Clarkston. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-52. - Private transportation of refuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person including city refuse collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the city to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-53. - Disposal of refuse and garbage generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the city except as may be permitted by city regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the real property on which such material was dumped. 
(c)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any state law prohibiting the dumping of garbage, refuse or litter on any public or private property within the city, the city council shall pay a reward in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of, to the person furnishing such information leading to such arrest and conviction and such monies as may be a necessary cost of the operation and administration of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-54. - Operation of private landfills. 
No sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the city without written approval of the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Secs. 19-55—19-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 

Sec. 19-71. - Notice to owner, occupant of unacceptable container or area. 
The city, upon determining that a can, container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the can, container or condition exists to inform such person of the condition existing. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-72. - Pickup routes and districts established. 
The city shall divide the city into pickup routes, which routes shall be plainly outlined on a map of the city and numbered numerically. The city shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each route; shall keep the map and lists for public inspection; and shall furnish a copy of the map showing any particular route along with a list of the names of the public thoroughfares therein to any person who requests them upon the payment of the actual cost for the reproduction of the map and list by either a city or commercial facility, whichever is available. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-73. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  All garbage shall be free from liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags and the tops secured and placed in a refuse receptacle. Receptacles adequate to hold the refuse normally accumulating between scheduled removals shall be provided on each premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with garbage, refuse or rubbish in the city. Yard trimmings, as herein defined, shall be segregated and placed in a separate approved receptacle or in biodegradable paper bags. It shall not be placed in a plastic bag. Tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers described above shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four (4) feet in length. No filled container, log, limb, filled paper bag or bundle shall exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. The city will not collect logs and limbs over four (4) inches in diameter or over four (4) feet in length. 
(3)  Liquids will not be collected by the city and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(4)  All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single residential unit, condominium or multiple residential unit not serviced by a commercial container to place refuse receptacles, watertight paper or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct passage; except that the director may require it to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. It shall also be the duty of the occupant to place the refuse at an appropriate curbside location at or before 8:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck; this placement shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and the owner shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from the refuse. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the occupant to remove containers from the curbside location to the storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; the removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(7)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property such person occupies or the public thoroughfares adjoining the property. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquid or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)  Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will be collected at the curb on an on-call and special fee basis to the department. 
(10)  Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 205, § 2, 11-5-96) 
Sec. 19-74. - Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection. 
(a)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the city. 
(b)  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the city for collection by the city. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, property located. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)  Where the occupants of two (2) or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(d)  The occupant, or occupants of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(e)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(f)  Commercial containers containing any of the following items will not be emptied: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)  Furniture. 
(3)  Tires. 
(4)  Wooden crates. 
(5)  Logs or limbs over four (4) feet in length or four (4) inches in diameter. 
(6)  Bed springs. 
(7)  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, etc. 
(8)  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(g)  Normal household appliances will be collected on a special fee basis at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the department. 
(h)  It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-75. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection by city. 
(a)  Refuse may be collected for disposal by the city or by persons or commercial sanitation firms licensed by the city. 
(b)  The city and its licensed scavengers will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse will be collected once each week from residential units except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)  Refuse will be collected as often as six (6) times a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)  Dead animals (other than dogs and house pets) will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets will be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag and placed at the curb. They will be collected on a special fee basis and on an on-call basis by the city. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by burying on the individual's property to whom the animal belongs as the city has no responsibility to supply service for the removal and disposal of large dead animals. 
(4)  Collection service shall be discontinued where garbage or trash cans or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by an inspector and notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-76. - Garbage collection for the disabled and elderly. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled or elderly and as a result thereof is being incapable of moving refuse shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This section does not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are disabled and/or elderly. Application of such persons for any exemption from curbside pickup shall be made in writing to the city clerk on forms provided by the city. Such applications will be reviewed by the sanitation committee of the city council whose decision as to the granting of exemptions from curbside pickup shall be final. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed ninety (90) days (extensions are required). 
(b)  Residential cans shall not be placed more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the curb or road edge, nor will refuse cans be picked up if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Gates are locked. 
(2)  Gates are wired or tied shut. 
(3)  Dogs are loose in yard. 
(4)  Cans are in carports or garages. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-77. - Statements, payment and sanitary docket. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk or the authorized deputy thereof to prepare and mail to each owner or commercial lessee in the sanitary districts of the city a statement showing the entire amount due for the calendar year, the amounts of the quarterly installments due and the amount in arrears, if any. These statements shall be prepared quarterly in advance and each quarterly payment shall be paid in advance by the owner and the payment shall become delinquent upon the first day of the next succeeding quarter. In accordance with section 2-6, a late payment penalty and an assessment of interest shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the time limits prescribed herein. Owners may pay the entire amount due for the calendar year in advance if they so desire. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk or the authorized deputy thereof to prepare, maintain and keep for public inspection a complete record of the name of each owner, the address or by tax map reference if no street address is available, the amount due for the calendar year, the amount of each quarterly payment and an entry showing when each payment was made. This record shall be called the sanitary docket and shall be prepared quarterly in advance. Each quarterly docket shall be cumulative of all unpaid quarterly installments. 
(c)  Upon the request of any person interested in examining the title of any parcel of real estate in the sanitary districts of the city, the person in charge of the maintenance of the sanitary docket under the supervision of the city clerk or the authorized deputy thereof shall furnish to such person a form statement showing the information required in this section, which form statement shall be signed by the person maintaining the docket and some authorized deputy as to the correctness of the information contained therein. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk or the authorized deputy thereof to make an annual audit of the sanitary docket during the last quarter of each calendar year, but not later than November 15, and issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fa.'s or executions issued for city taxes. Each quarterly installment shall immediately become a lien against the property served upon the date it falls due. 
(e)  On premises being served by the department where there is a delinquent sanitary installment, after the owner or commercial lessee thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due installment in a current statement or on a separate bill or other notice and the owner or commercial lessee refuses to promptly pay it, the city may refuse sanitary pickup at those premises, regardless of whether the installment remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or commercial lessee, and sanitary service shall not be restored until these delinquent and current installments are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-78. - Fee. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse shall be as established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-79. - Burning combustible materials in containers owned or used by city. 
No person shall burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned in any container belonging to or used by the city for refuse collection purposes any combustible material of any nature. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-80. - Sanitation fees for tax exempt properties. 
Properties within the city owned by churches, fraternal lodges, or other owners which are exempt from ad valorem taxation shall not be exempt from the fees imposed under this chapter. Said properties shall either provide for their own garbage and refuse collection through use of commercial containers or shall be subject to the same fees as may be established by the city council for collection from commercial users. 
(Ord. No. 188, § 1, 8-2-94) 
Secs. 19-81—19-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SERVICES 

Sec. 19-91. - Definition. 
In this division, "commercial sanitation firm" includes any person engaged in the business of operating a sanitary compactor. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-92. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating a commercial sanitation firm without a license issued by the city. A license application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the department for approval or other disposition. 
(b)  Applications are available and may be submitted at the Clarkston City Hall, 3921 Church Street during working hours (9:00 a.m.—5:30 p.m.) Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers and/or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for a permit to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the sanitation district. 
(d)  Approved licenses shall become effective on the first day of the calendar year. The fee to be paid to the city for each approved application shall be as established by action of the Clarkston City Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. The fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year from the day this license is approved. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-93. - Performance bond. 
Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall post a performance bond with the city in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-94. - Monthly charge for each container in use. 
In addition, each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for each stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month. This fee shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-95. - Decals on trucks. 
Each truck used by a commercial sanitation firm to collect and transport combustible solid waste shall bear a decal issued by the department. The issuance and placement of the decal must be accomplished at the city sanitation office. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-96. - Decals, identification on compactors, containers. 
Each stationary compactor and industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot a decal issued by the city which shows it has been properly permitted to operate in the city. In addition each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container. Any arrangement between firms to service another's units must receive written approval from the city. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-97. - Installation of stationary compactor unit; prior approval of plan. 
Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved by the city prior to the installation. All stationary compactor shredders and stationary compactor containers shall be installed on class A, three thousand (3,000) psi concrete pads of not less than six-inch thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the city mechanical code, fire code and health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-98. - Special permit for handling special industrial waste. 
Special permits shall be granted to firms holding stationary compactor permits for the installation of special industrial waste containers to handle refuse requiring special handling or special equipment. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-99. - Establishment contracting services exempt from city sanitary assessment. 
A commercial establishment which contracts with a firm licensed to operate a stationary compactor service shall not be required to pay city sanitary assessment while it uses the stationary compactor service, provided additional service is not supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Sec. 19-100. - Disposal of collected refuse. 
Licensees under this division may dispose of their stationary compactor refuse and all acceptable industrial waste container refuse at the county disposal facilities at a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 185, 9-7-93) 
Secs. 19-101—19-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 200, adopted June 4, 1996, has been included herein as Art. IV, § 19-121 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings, § 5-1 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 5-100 et seq.; health and sanitation, § 10-1 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 16-1 et seq. 

Sec. 19-121. - Adoption of Chapter 22.5 of DeKalb County Code. 
The City of Clarkston does hereby adopt the Storm Water Quality Management Code of DeKalb County, Georgia as codified in Chapter 22.5 of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia. The city council further grants, pursuant to its authority to enter into intergovernmental agreements, to the public works department of DeKalb County, Georgia, the authority to enforce said Storm Water Quality Management Code within the city. 
(Ord. No. 200, 6-4-96) 
Secs. 19-122—19-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Stormwater management and control, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 19-130. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article V, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
Credit. A conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by a property owner, which system, facility, service or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Detached dwelling unit. A developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses and manufactured homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. It may also include out buildings and separate garages used in conjunction with the house. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing structures used for non-residential purposes. 
Developed land. Property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than two hundred (200) square feet of impervious surfaces as defined in this Section. 
Duplexes and triplexes. Developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more lots or parcels of land. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) of impervious area. The median average impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit properties in the City of Clarkston as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of impervious area shall be one equivalent residential unit. 
Multiple dwelling unit residential properties. Developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding house, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers and other structures in which four (4) or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit properties shall be treated as other developed land. 
Other developed property. Properties including, but not limited to, multiple dwelling units residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious services, parking lots, parks, recreation facilities, houses of worship, public and private schools and universities, government buildings, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, nursing homes, and mixed use developments. 
Stormwater charges. The stormwater management service charge or charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the City of Clarkston's stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. Service charges will be based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of services and facilities, and may include but are not necessarily limited to the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or of grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to individual customers for services or facilities related to stormwater management, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the City of Clarkston. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-131. - Determination and modification of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater services charges may be determined and modified from time to time by the city council so that the total revenue generated by said charges and any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility will be sufficient to meet the cost of services and facilities, including but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for improvements to the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-132. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning ____________ , and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-133. - Stormwater service charges. 
(a)  In order to recover the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the city, the following stormwater rates shall apply: 
(1)  Detached dwelling units shall be charged the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit as specified below, or as hereafter amended. 
(2)  All developed lands not classified as detached dwelling units shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit (ERU) for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof. 
(b)  The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall be five dollars and thirty-three cents ($5.33) per month. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 424 , § 1, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 19-134. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
(a)  Except as provided in this Section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility(s cost of providing stormwater service and facilities. Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities, as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Undeveloped land as defined in this article shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(c)  Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service charges, provided however, that railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used by the railroad for its purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(d)  Developed land other than individual detached dwelling units may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The stormwater service charge credit may be up to forty (40) percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(e)  Groups of detached dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association providing on-site systems, facilities, services, or activities which reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility(s cost of providing services and facilities may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The stormwater service charge credit available to groups of detached buildings may be up to forty (40) percent of the service charge applicable to individual properties, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, service and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the homeowners association reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(f)  In determining the amount of the credit to be applied, the following criterion shall be considered and a credit granted upon a showing of the following: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet water quality standards in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated from time to time. 
(2)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities properly sized and functioning to meet the channel protection standards in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(3)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the overbank flood protection standards in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(4)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the extreme flood protection standards in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(g)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for non-compliance. 
(h)  Property owners seeking service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the city of a stormwater service charge credit application prior to January 1st of the year in which stormwater service charges are billed by the city (except for 2006, in which applications must be received by May 1, 2006. Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the city for the remainder of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. 
(i)  Upon receipt of a timely filed completed application, the head of the department of public works, in conjunction with the appropriate parties at DeKalb County, or their designee, shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within sixty (60) days of the date the completed application was submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-135. - Inspection of private facilities. 
Continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards may be verified by the city, or its designee's, inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the city or its designee shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing on such property in order to assure compliance with the city's design and performance standards. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the city's design and performance standards shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the city inspectors' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-136. - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, and collections. 
A stormwater service charge will be added to the annual DeKalb County ad valorem/real estate tax billing sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to one (1) year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one and one-half percent (01.5%) late charge per month shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06) 
Sec. 19-137. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city within thirty (30) days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  City staff shall conduct technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within sixty (60) days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the city may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city pursuant to subsection (a) may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of DeKalb County, filed within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the decision by the city. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-7-06; ; Ord. No. 376, § 18, 12-3-13 ) 
Chapter 20 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 387, §§ 1, 2(attach.), adopted May 5, 2015 , repealed former Ch. 20, §§ 20-1—20-17, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 22-1—22-17, and Ord. No. 376, §§ 19—23, adopted Dec. 3, 2013 . 
Charter reference— Regulating vehicles for hire, § 1.03(t). 
Cross reference— Restrooms in taxi offices, etc., § 10-22. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
Company means any person, association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
Driver means an individual that drives a vehicle for hire. 
Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle, animal-drawn vehicle or other vehicle or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the charges for the use of which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged. Excluded from this definition are intraurban buses and vehicles exclusively regulated by the state public service commission. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any company or driver to transport any person from any place within the city to any other place (within or outside the city) in a vehicle for hire without first having complied with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-3. - Permit from DeKalb County, Gwinnett County, City of Decatur or the City of Atlanta required. 
The privilege of operating a vehicle for hire for transporting any person from any place within the city to any other place shall be limited to those companies and those drivers holding a valid permit or license to operate vehicles for hire issued by DeKalb County, Gwinnett County, the City of Decatur or the City of Atlanta. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-4. - Revocation of company's privilege to operate vehicles for hire. 
Upon citation, due process and a proper showing by the police that any company engaged in the operation of vehicles for hire within the city is conducting such business in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city or the law of the state, or is being operated for an illegal or immoral purpose, the judge of the municipal court may revoke the privilege to operate vehicles for hire within the city for such time as the judge may deem proper. Such penalty may be imposed in addition to any other authorized penalty for violation of city ordinance or law. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-5. - Revocation of driver's privilege to operate vehicles for hire. 
Upon citation, due process and a proper showing by the police or by the records of other courts that a driver is not physically, mentally or morally fit to operate a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city, the judge of the municipal court may revoke any driver's privilege to operate a vehicle for hire within the city for such period as such judge may deem proper. Such penalty may be imposed in addition to any other authorized penalty for violation of city ordinance or law. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-6. - Mechanical condition and inspection of motor vehicles. 
All motor vehicles for hire operating within the city shall be kept in good mechanical condition, shall comply with the state motor vehicle inspection law, and while being used for such purposes, shall be subject to a periodic inspection by the chief of police or the chief's representative. If, upon inspection, any such motor vehicle shall be found unfit for safe use, such motor vehicle shall not be used as a vehicle for hire within the city until it is put in proper mechanical condition and approved by such officer for further use. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-7. - Exceeding passengers capacity of motor vehicles. 
The number of persons to be transported in any motor vehicle for hire in the city at any one time shall not exceed the number of seatbelts in such vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-8. - Identification of vehicles for hire and drivers. 
(a)  Every vehicle for hire operating within the city shall have plainly printed on each side thereof the name of the company operating such vehicle for hire. 
(b)  Every driver operating a motor vehicle for hire shall display within the vehicle his driver's permit in a place plainly visible to passengers. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Sec. 20-9. - Schedule of rates to be posted. 
Every vehicle for hire operating within the city shall have posted therein in a place plainly visible to passengers hiring such vehicle a schedule of rates charged to passengers in exchange for transportation within such vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 387, § 2(attach.), 5-5-15 ) 
Chapter 21 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, § 5-100 et seq.; protection of wetlands, § 5-200 et seq.; stormwater management, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 21-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "City of Clarkston Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § I), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPS): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director: The director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District: The DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 21-4(c). 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 21-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.;p0; State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code [O.C.G.A.] Section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § II), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 21-4(c), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § III), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 21-4(b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 21-4(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection 21-4(b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection 21-4(c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 21-4(b)(2); 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year-round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured- horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 21-4(b) and (c). 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § IV), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Clarkston without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the director of public works and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 21-5(c). Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 21-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 21-4(c)(15) and (16). has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 21-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 21-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection 21-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 21-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § V), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The director of public works will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The director of public works shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § VI), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 21-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter or any other provision of law to the contrary, the municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § VII), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § VIII), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § IX), 9-7-10) 
Sec. 21-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 8th day of September, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1(Attach. § X), 9-7-10) 
Chapter 22 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adoption of county regulations, § 19-121 et seq.; stormwater utility services, § 19-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - POSTDEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 22-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(a)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(b)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(c)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(d)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(e)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(f)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(g)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to Subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director of public works to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; and 
(3)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-3. - Designation of article administrator. 
The director of public works or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-4. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-5. - Stormwater design manual. 
The City of Clarkston will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-6. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Detention means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Clarkston or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended Detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious Cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial Stormwater Permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Clarkston to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-7. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
Permit application requirements: 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Clarkston a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 22-8; 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 22-9; 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 22-109, if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond in accordance with section 22-11, if applicable; and 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 22-12. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-8. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the City of Clarkston for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, the DeKalb County greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-9. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 22-15 below. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 22-15 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 22-15; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Clarkston as provided in section 22-10 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 22-10. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-10. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Clarkston, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also includeremedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 22-18. 
(f)  The City of Clarkston, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-11. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
The city may require the posting of appropriate bonds by the owner or developer to insure performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-12. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Clarkston. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 22-9 above two (2) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included. 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater managment plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (c) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 22-17. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-13. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-14. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-15. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(a)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(b)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event; provided, however, that this requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(c)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under subsection 22-15(b) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided; provided however, that this requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(d)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated; provided however that this requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(e)  Structural stormwater controls. 
(1)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(2)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(f)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (a) above. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(g)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(h)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-16. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Clarkston or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-17. - Final inspection and as built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-18. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Clarkston, may correct the violation as provided in section 22-21 hereof. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-18. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-19. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-20. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-21. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(c)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(d)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. -The City of Clarkston may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the City of Clarkston may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 295, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Secs. 22-22—22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-50. - Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area established by subsection 22-54(a)(1) below, lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land Disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Clarkston required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 22-54(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twsenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the City of Clarkston may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-51. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 22-50 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-52. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(a)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(c)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-53. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(a)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
(1)  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
(2)  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
(3)  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
(4)  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
(5)  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
(6)  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(b)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 22-53 (a)(1), above. 
(c)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(d)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(e)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city public works director or his designee on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the public works director or his designee to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 22-55 below. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-54. - Land development requirements. 
Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-55. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the director of public works finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, after review and recommendation from the zoning and review commission, the city council of Clarkston may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city council. 
(b)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
(1)  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
(2)  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the article would create an extreme hardship. 
(c)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(d)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(e)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(5)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-56. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other article, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-57. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
f.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
g.  Any other documentation that the director of public works or his designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-58. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Clarkston, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-59. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director of public works or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the director of public works or his designee in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-60. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions hereinafter described. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-61. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the director of public works or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the director of public works by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-62. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director of public works or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the director of public works may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(a)  Stop work order. The director of public works may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(b)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director of public works may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director of public works may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director of public works may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(d)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the director of public works shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) after the director of public works has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the director of public works may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(e)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the director of public works may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 22-63. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of director of public works, may appeal in writing within ten (10) days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city clerk and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and city council within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of mayor and city council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 9-6-05) 
Secs. 22-64—22-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 22-90. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system, and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure, compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the City of Clarkston. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The director of public works or his or her designee of the City of Clarkston shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 1), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-91. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
(City of Clarkston) separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Clarkston; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 22-92. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City of Clarkston separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public healthy, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 2), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-92. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the director of public works of the City of Clarkston as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the director of public works of the city. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the director of public works of the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the director of public works of the city. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 3), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-93. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director of public works prior to allowing discharges to the separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 4), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-94. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The director of public works shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the director of public works. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the director of public works ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The director of public works shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director of public works to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The director of public works may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the director of public works. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the director of public works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director of public works of access to a facility is a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  If the director of public works has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the director of public works is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the director of public works may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 5), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-95. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director of public works of the City of Clarkston within three (3) business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 6), 9-1-09) 
Sec. 22-96. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the director of public works is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The director of public works is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection 22-96(e). 
(b)  Notice of violations. Whenever the director of public works finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the director of public works may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the director of public works by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director of public works. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor and city council of the director of public works or his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal within ten (10) days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the director of public works of the City of Clarkston, then representatives of the director of public works may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within five (5) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Clarkston by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the director of public works shall deem appropriate, after the director of public works has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the director of public works may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the police department of the City of Clarkston may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court of the City of Clarkston to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. 
(1)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the director of public works may seek cumulative remedies. 
(2)  The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 338-A, § 1(Attach. § 7), 9-1-09) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, §§ 1—12, adopted Oct.1, 2013, substantially amended former Appendix, Arts. I—XIV. Former App. A derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted April 23, 2007, as amended. 
The zoning ordinance is printed herein as enacted, except that figures or letters appearing in brackets have been added by the editor. Amendatory enactments subsequent to Ord. No. 325 are cited in parentheses following the amended sections. 
Cross reference— Gasoline service station, Ch. 9.5; planning and zoning commission, § 15-1 et seq.; subdivision, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— The Zoining Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), adopted Oct. 1, 2013, amended former Art. I, §§ 100—102 in its entirety. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted April 23, 2007. 

Sec. 100. - Title. 
This Appendix A to the City of Clarkston, Georgia Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the "Clarkston Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 101. - Applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all present and future land development located within the incorporated area of Clarkston, Georgia. The requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. This article shall regulate the height, number of stories, and the size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location and use of buildings and other structures: and the use, condition of use or occupancy of land and trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation, agriculture or for any other purpose; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; creating a planning and zoning board and defining the powers and duties thereof; providing penalties and resolutions and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Clarkston Zoning Ordinance shall be to improve and protect the aesthetic values of land and property, public health and the following purposes listed below: 
(a)  To protect existing development in the city. 
(b)  To improve the property within the city through redevelopment, where appropriate. 
(c)  To prevent damage to improved property by way of natural disasters. 
(d)  To prevent overcrowding of schools and other public facilities. 
(e)  To achieve such timing, density, and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overloading public infrastructure systems for providing water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, sanitation, police and fire protection, and other public services. 
(f)  To achieve such density, distribution and design of land development and use as will protect the traffic movement capabilities of streets within the city and prevent traffic hazards. 
(g)  To encourage such distribution of population, land development and use as will facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of public services and facilities. 
(h)  To achieve such density, design, and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values and facilitate the provision of adequate housing for every citizen. 
(i)  To secure such accessibility, design and density of land development and use as will reduce fire hazards and fire losses. 
(j)  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Clarkston. 
(k)  To encourage greater efficiency and economy of land development through natural resource conservation. 
(l)  To preserve the city's natural beauty and encourage architecturally pleasing development. 
(m)  To improve the quality of life through protection of the city's total environment including the prevention of air, visual, water and noise pollution. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 103. - General use regulations. 
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this Clarkston Zoning Ordinance. Any use of property not expressly permitted by this Clarkston Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 104. - Development projects under construction. 
Nothing in this article shall require any change in the development or proposed use of properties which are legally under construction or for which a development plan or preliminary plat has been approved within five (5) years of the effective date of this article and the development of which shall be commenced within one (1) year after the effective date of this article. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2013, repealed former Art. III, §§ 301—323, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, 4-23-07; Ord. No. 358, §§ 1, 2, 3-1-11. 

Sec. 301. - Administration of ordinance. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee, and he is hereby given the authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 302. - Application requirements. 
(a)  All applications to amend the zoning map (rezoning) shall, as part of the application, include a site analysis at a readable scale (1" = 100' minimum). Such site analysis shall include a depiction of: 
(1)  Existing shape and dimensions of each lot that is the subject of the application, including the size, measurement and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot(s). 
(2)  Existing location of utilities. 
(3)  Streams, creeks, lakes and ponds. 
(4)  Easements and rights of way. 
(b)  All applications seeking any of the actions listed (1)—(4) below shall include a set of development plans, as defined in subsection (c), with the application: 
(1)  Applications to rezone property to NC-1, NC-2, NR-CD, RC or TC. 
(2)  Applications to amend the future development map. 
(3)  Applications to approve a planned development. 
(4)  Applications for issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  Development plans. When required by subsection (b), development plans shall be at a readable scale (1" = 100' minimum), contain the required number of sets (specified on each application) and shall demonstrate compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance. Unless waived by the building official as inapplicable in the case of minor building permits, development plans shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Boundary survey completed by a certified surveyor and depicting, at a minimum, the features listed in subsection (a). 
(2)  A correct scale and north arrow. 
(3)  The present zoning classification of the subject and all adjacent parcels. 
(4)  Proposed land use and building footprints with door locations. 
(5)  The gross square footage of proposed buildings. 
(6)  Required yard setbacks appropriately dimensioned. 
(7)  Densities. 
(8)  The location of required off-street parking and loading spaces including total number of spaces, space and driveway dimensions. 
(9)  Internal circulation including the proposed location of all driveways and entry/exit points for vehicular traffic, using arrows to depict direction of movement. 
(10)  Building height. 
(11)  Sidewalks. 
(12)  Utilities, grading, drainage, amenities, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
(13)  Any applicable buffer boundaries such as: streams, or other planted buffers as required by zoning district, 
(14)  Landscape and tree plan. This plan shall demonstrate compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance related to landscaping and trees by depicting: 
(i)  Landscaping, including tree species, the number of all plantings, and landscaping that is replacing what is being removed. 
(ii)  The location and extent of required buffers and screened areas, depicting extent of natural vegetation and type and location of additional vegetation if required. 
(iii)  Open space. 
(15)  Architectural design. The architectural design elements showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance which shall include but not be limited to: 
(i)  Scaled elevation drawings of proposed structures. 
(ii)  Information on building materials, features, exterior finish, windows, doors, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 415 , § 1, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 303. - Application submittal and completeness. 
No application shall be deemed accepted and filed until all required forms have been completed and all required materials have been submitted, including fees. The date an application is complete and hence accepted and filed shall be noted on the application form by the city planner or other designee as appointed by the city manager. Any subsequent deadlines tied to date of application shall begin to run as of said date. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 304. - Zoning ordinance and map amendment procedure. 
The city zoning ordinance, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the mayor and city council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been first submitted to the planning and zoning board for review and recommendation. 
(a)  City planner review. Upon receipt of an application for amendment of the city zoning ordinance or zoning map, the designated city planner shall review the application and prepare a written analysis of the application, which shall be provided to the planning and zoning board as well as the city council. In the absence of a designated city planner, the application shall proceed directly to planning and zoning board review. 
(b)  Planning and zoning board review. 
(1)  All applications for zoning text or map amendments shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board for review. Such review shall be conducted based upon the standards for land use approval set forth in section 305 of this article. The planning and zoning board shall meet with the applicant and consider the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Such meeting shall include a public hearing and the planning and zoning board shall take comment from the applicant and the public with regard to the application. Following the public input and comment, the planning and zoning board shall, upon appropriate motion, vote to recommend approval or denial of the application. It may make such recommendations as it deems appropriate in the best interests of the city, including the specification of certain conditions to its approval of any proposed zoning action. 
(2)  The planning and zoning board shall make a written report of its recommendation to the city council and mayor with respect to its findings. Such written report shall be a part of the permanent record of the application and shall be reported at any meeting of the city council which considers the application. Upon motion, the planning and zoning board may defer any application which it deems to be incomplete. An application may be deferred on only one occasion. An applicant may withdraw his application at any time until a final recommendation on the application is issued by the planning and zoning board. 
(3)  Failure to act. 
a.  Failure by the planning and zoning board to act upon any application shall not cause delay of process unless such failure is due to incomplete data or information in an application. Should the planning and zoning board fail to act upon any complete application, it shall pass to the city council with a notation thereon that the planning and zoning board has reviewed but failed to act upon the application. 
b.  If the planning and zoning board fails to submit a report within thirty (30) days of its first meeting after it has received an amendment request complete in all respects, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendment. However, the planning and zoning board and the applicant for an amendment may jointly agree to a postpone action for a thirty-day period. 
(4)  The city council shall hear the application at its next meeting which complies with the Zoning Procedures Act of the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Provisions for application withdrawal shall be as established in section 310. 
(c)  City council and mayor. 
(1)  Public hearing procedures. Before the mayor and city council shall approve any amendment to the city's zoning ordinance, they shall hold a public hearing thereon, except for amendments to section 311, for which no public hearing shall be required. 
a.  The notice of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the hearing on the proposed action, such publication to be in the legal organ for DeKalb County, Georgia. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
b.  Said public hearing may be continued to the next regular city council meeting date and for additional consecutive regular meeting dates, or such other date as directed by the mayor, without further legal notice as good planning requirements dictate and the mayor and city council deem necessary, provided that the date on the sign advertising the hearing be changed to reflect the continued hearing date. 
c.  If the requested zoning action is for the rezoning of property and is initiated by a party (applicant) other than the city, then: 
(i)  City staff shall erect on the subject property, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, a sign giving the date, place and time of the city council public hearing; the applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that such sign stays where placed and in legible condition. 
(ii)  The notice to the legal organ as required above shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification for the property. 
(2)  Final action. 
a.  The city council and mayor shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. Such final zoning action may occur at the time of the public hearing or at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
b.  The city council shall not be bound by, but shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning board in its deliberations on the application. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 305. - Zoning proposal review standards. 
When any request is made for a change in the zoning for any parcel of property, or when an amendment is requested to the zoning map, the planning and zoning board and the city council shall make their recommendations and ultimate decision with regard to such request after due and diligent consideration of the following: 
(1)  The effect upon the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public compared to any hardship imposed upon the individual property owner seeking rezoning should rezoning be denied; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(4)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(5)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that may cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal is compatible with the principals of the city's long range plan as set forth in the Conceptual Master Land Use and Connectivity Plan for the City of Clarkston, a part of the Clarkston Livable Centers Initiative Study as adopted in March 2005, adopted as the city's comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Whether the zoning proposal is compatible with the most current adopted version of the Future Development Map of the Clarkston Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 306. - Conditional rezonings. 
With the consent of the applicant for rezoning, the city council may attach conditions to the rezoning of property. Such conditions of zoning shall be in writing and included with the motion to approve rezoning of the property. When a property is so zoned, the official zoning map shall denote that the property is zoned "conditional." The written conditions associated with a rezoning shall be maintained by and copies of such conditional ordinances may be obtained from the City Clerk. Any conditions imposed by the city council in connection with a rezoning shall remain in effect until and unless they are removed by a subsequent rezoning by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 415 , § 2, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 307. - Variance procedures. 
The mayor and city council may authorize upon proper application in specific cases, variance from the terms of this zoning ordinance. Applications should be submitted and reviewed by the designated city planner for technical review and recommendation in the form of a written staff report. The staff report shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning board for their consideration. In the absence of a designated city planner, once reviewed for completion by the public works director, applications shall be forwarded directly to the planning and zoning board, which shall review the application and conduct a public hearing in accordance with section 304(b) of this appendix. 
(a)  Before the mayor and city council act upon an application for a variance, they shall hold a public hearing thereon. The notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing in the inspector legal organ of the city or in the inspector legal organ of DeKalb County. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(b)  In addition, city staff shall erect, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in a conspicuous place on the property involved, a sign which shall contain: information as to the variance applied for and the time and place of hearing. However, failure to erect and maintain the sign as specified above shall not invalidate the subsequent determination of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Mayor and city council decision. 
(1)  The mayor and city council shall make a "variance decision" for each application. For purposes of this article the term "variance decision" means final action by the mayor and city council which results in a variance approval, approval with conditions, or a variance denial. 
(2)  The "variance decision" shall be made based upon an evaluation of the variance criteria provided in section 308 of this article. 
(3)  Said final action shall be made no later than sixty (60) days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
(4)  The mayor and city council may require accompanying written requirements as part of a "variance decision," thereby approving the variance as "conditional." 
(5)  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the "variance decision." 
(6)  Appeals of a "variance decision" of the mayor and city council by an aggrieved party shall be available by writ of certiorari to the DeKalb County superior court. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 308. - Variance criteria. 
A variance from the terms of this ordinance must not be contrary to the public interest. Thus, the mayor and council may attach thereto any conditions which may be deemed advisable to the extent that the purpose of this ordinance will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the city council that all of the following conditions exist: 
Variance criteria: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
(2)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved. 
(3)  Such conditions are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
(4)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would create an unnecessary hardship. 
(5)  The variance requested will not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. 
(6)  The variance is not a request to permit a structure or use of land not authorized in the applicable district. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 309. - Administrative variances. 
The city manager or his designee shall have the option to grant variances from the development and design standards of this ordinance, where, in his/her opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. All applicants for administrative variances must complete the forms and follow procedures as required by the city in section 307. Each request for an administrative variance must be reviewed in accordance with the criteria established in section 308 of this ordinance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variance from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street—Reduction not to exceed ten percent of that required. 
(2)  Side yard—Variance not to exceed three (3) feet reduction. 
(3)  Rear yard—Variance not to exceed five (5) feet reduction. 
(4)  Height of building—Variance not to exceed five (5) feet reduction. 
(5)  Fenestration—Not to exceed twenty (20) percent deducted from the requirement. 
(6)  Landscape zone—Variance not to exceed two (2) feet deduction. 
(7)  Sidewalk zone—Not to exceed two (2) feet deduction. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 310. - Reapplication to the mayor and city council for variance or zoning amendments. 
If an application for a variance or rezoning is denied by the mayor and city council, then such variance or rezoning of the same property may not again be considered until the expiration of at least twelve (12) months from the date of the original application. This limitation shall not apply to a rezoning initiated by the City of Clarkston or to cases where the city, by majority vote of the city council, waives the one-year limitation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 415 , § 3, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 311. - Zoning and sign fees. 
The zoning and sign fees designated by the mayor and city council of Clarkston shall be established by separate ordinance or resolution, to be updated as necessary. However, no fee shall be charged for the construction of new fences. 
Any application or permit filed pursuant to this ordinance for which the subject matter has been partially or wholly undertaken prior to approval or permit by the mayor and city council of Clarkston, the fee charged for said application or permit shall be double the amount listed in the fees ordinance (Number 297). 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 312. - Conditional use permit. 
Certain uses of property, designated as conditional uses, Article VII this Zoning Ordinance, are declared to possess characteristics that may be incompatible with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. No conditional use shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, performed, or otherwise undertaken without first obtaining a conditional use permit. 
In addition, any use that may be compatible with existing uses in the area where it is proposed and is conisistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning district wherein it is proposed to be located, but does not expressly fit into the list of permitted uses for such zoning district shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
The mayor and city council shall hear applications for conditional use permits. the mayor and city council shall issue a conditional use permit to an applicant upon a finding that the proposed conditional use would generally be in the public interest. 
(1)  In considering whether a proposed conditional use is in the public interest, the mayor and city council shall consider the following, among other relevant factors: 
a.  Whether the conditional use would be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity or diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  Whether the proposed conditional use would increase local or state expenditures in relation to cost of servicing or maintaining neighboring properties; 
c.  Whether the establishment of the conditional use would impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area; and 
d.  Whether the location and character of the proposed conditional use would be consistent with a desirable pattern of development for the locality in general. 
(2)  Once a conditional use has been approved by the mayor and council, said conditional use and any conditions shall run with the land upon which the conditional use was approved. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 313. - Temporary use permit. 
(1)  Certain temporary uses of property may be permitted in the NC-1, NC-2, TC and I districts of the city. 
(2)  Temporary uses include festivals, famer's markets, tent sales or the sale of goods from any temporary location, including but not limited to, holiday sales, fireworks sales or Christmas tree sales, as well as other special events of community interest. 
(3)  Temporary uses are only permitted with the advance approval of the city manager or his designee. No permit for a temporary use shall be issued unless: 
(a)  Written permission of the property owner is presented. 
(b)  The temporary use is not located within twenty-five (25) feet of any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Adequate parking, ingress and egress are provided on site. 
(4)  No temporary use may last more than forty-five (45) consecutive days. 
(5)  No more than two (2) temporary use permits may be obtained per parcel per year. 
(6)  Food truck means a mobile conveyance equipped with facilities necessary to safely store and/or prepare food and/or drink for consumption, from which customers may directly purchase food and/or drink. Temporary use permits issued by the city manager or his designee for a temporary food truck use shall not count toward the limit of two (2) temporary use permits per parcel per year as set out in subsection (5). Food trucks approved by the city manager or his designee may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a public right of way if approved for such location by the city manager or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 390, § 1, 9-1-15 ) 
Sec. 314. - Powers of the mayor and city council with respect to zoning appeals. 
The mayor and city council shall have the following powers with respect to zoning appeals: 
(a)  Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(b)  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by city staff in the interpretation or enforcement of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  In exercising the above powers, the mayor and city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination from which the appeal is taken, and to that end, may issue or direct the issuance of a building or occupancy permit. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 315. - Appeals from final decisions of the mayor and city council. 
Any person with a special interest in a zoning decision that is substantially aggrieved by any final decision of the mayor and city council may take an appeal to the superior court. Such an appeal to the superior court shall be by writ of certiorari and shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision of the mayor and city council. Upon failure to file the appeal within thirty (30) days, the decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Secs. 316—318. - Reserved. 
Sec. 319. - Construction and use consistency with application, plans, and permit. 
Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building inspector authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other use, arrangement, or construction which varies from approved plans shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
All departments, inspectors and public employees of the City of Clarkston which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no permit or license for any use, building, or purpose if the same shall be in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 320. - Zoning of annexed property. 
(a)  Upon annexation of property, the city council shall assign the annexed property a zoning designation. Based on the DeKalb County zoning of the annexation property, the city council will assign the corresponding city zoning designation listed in subsection (b) unless the city council determines that a different zoning designation is more appropriate based on the criteria set forth in section 305. 
(b)  DeKalb County to City Of Clarkston zoning conversion table. 

 
  
( Ord. No. 415 , § 4, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 321. - Future development map amendments. 
The future development map of the comprehensive plan may be amended by the mayor and city council. Future development map amendment applications shall be filed with the city clerk. All filed applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures established in sections 304(a) and 304(b) of this article. Amendments to the future development map shall meet the following procedures and criteria: 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. Future development map amendments may be initiated by one of the following: 
(1)  The mayor and city council may initiate amendments to the future development map. The requirements for applications in section 302 shall not apply to amendments initiated by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation or agency may initiate applications to amend the future development map, provided that said person, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of all of the property involved. 
(b)  Applications to amend the future development map. 
(1)  Each application to amend the future development map shall be filed with the city clerk and shall include the following information: 
a.  A legal description of the tract(s) that are the subject of the application. 
b.  The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract and agent(s), if any. 
c.  Whenever the applicant is not the property owner, the owner shall certify by notarized signature that (s)he has given authority to the applicant to file the application. When properties have more than one (1) owner, the notarized signature of all property owners shall be required. 
d.  An application fee established by the city. 
e.  The land use classification for the tract(s), as shown on the future development map and when necessary, the present and proposed zoning classification. 
f.  A written analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to the criteria established in subsection (d) of this section 321. 
g.  Other materials reasonably required by the city necessary to the analysis of the application. 
(c)  Review. With respect to each application for a future development map amendment, the review commissions shall investigate and make a recommendation based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal is compatible with the surrounding future land uses as identified in the future development map. 
(2)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal can be adequately served by existing transportation facilities and other infrastructure, such as schools, water and sewer. 
(3)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal negatively impacts natural and historic resources identified by the city. 
(4)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal is in the best interest of the city and the public good and whether the proposal protects the health and welfare of its citizens. 
(5)  Whether the property to be affected by the future development map amendment proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently designated on the future development map. 
(6)  Whether the future development map proposal meets the policies and intent established in the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Re-submittal of land use amendment application. An application for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more often than once every six (6) months; however, this provision shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment filed by the mayor and city council or by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 322. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or both for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 323. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the mayor or council of Clarkston, the building inspector, or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEFINITIONS[5] 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
•  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
•  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
•  The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
•  The word "erected" includes the words "constructed" "moved" "located" or "relocated". 
•  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
•  The word "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning map of Clarkston, Georgia. 
•  The word, "person" includes the words "individuals", "firms", "partnerships", "corporations", "associations", "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
•  The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
•  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". 
Accessory building: A structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure, located on the same lot, and operated or maintained under the same ownership as the principal structure." 
Accessory use: A land use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use. 
Agriculture: The production, rearing or storage of crops and/or livestock for sale, lease or personal use, or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. 
Alley: A public street which ordinarily affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration: A change or rearrangement in the exterior walls or structural parts, or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing the height, or the moving of said building or structure from one location or position to another. In addition to the foregoing, any building or structure shall be considered as being altered whenever it is repaired, renovated, remodeled, or rebuilt at a cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of its fair sales value immediately prior to the beginning of such repairs, renovation, remodeling, or rebuilding. 
Automobile repair center or garage: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers such as collision service, body repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning; and undercoating. For vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any goods, articles or merchandise. Such engines, motor vehicles, trailers, or parts thereof may remain in an inoperable condition for a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
Automobile service center: Any building, structure or land used for the dispensing, sale, any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories and where general automotive servicing is performed, such as replacement of mufflers, shocks and tires and motor tune-ups, as distinguished from major automotive repairs. 
Automobile service station (filling station): A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation or minor services, customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted if enclosed in a building. 
Automobile storage yard or used car lot: A lot or group of continuous lots used for the storage, display or sale of operable automobiles where no repair work is done. This would include secondhand car lots. 
Automobile sales: The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display and sale of new or used motor vehicles, and including any warranty repair work or other repair service; provided, however, that such definition shall not include the sale by an individual of motor vehicles acquired for such individual's own use and actually so used. 
Automobile storage yard and wrecker service: An establishment used for the short-term storage of damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
Basement (daylight): A story partly underground and having at least one-half (½) of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as one-half (½) story for the purpose of height measurement if used for dwelling or business purposes. 
Boarding house: A dwelling in which meals or lodging or both are furnished for compensation to more than two (2) but not more than ten (10) non-transient persons. 
Buffer: An undisturbed area that shall remain in its natural state and enhanced with additional landscaping in order to provide separation and screening for adjacent properties and adjacent rights-of-way. 
Buffer area: A strip of land established to protect 1 type of land use from another with which it is incompatible containing a continuous visual screening of vegetation and fencing. 
Buffer, landscape: An area using transitional screening elements such as fences, walls, and/or landscape plantings to separate and partially screen adjacent properties and adjacent rights-of-way. 
Building: Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building coverage: The horizontal area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. 
Building facade: The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes, and which may also be referred to as the building face. 
Building height, residential: For all single-family residential detached buildings and structures, building heights shall be the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the front door threshold of the existing or previously existing house on the property, to the highest point of the roof. See "threshold, front door" definition. 
Building height, non-residential: For all buildings and structures not classified as residential, building heights shall be the vertical distance measured from the finished front yard grade to the highest point of the roof. 
Building line or front yard set back line: A line, usually fixed parallel to the lot line, beyond which a building, or any projection thereof, cannot extend, excluding uncovered steps, terraces, stoops or similar fixtures. 
Canopy: A roof-like covering that projects from the wall of a building, or is freestanding, for the purpose of shielding from the elements. 
Canopy, gas station: A permanent structure above gasoline pumps supported independently or partially by other means, such as via a connection to the main building at the gas station location. 
Carport or garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of main building. A carport would be considered a private garage. 
Car wash: A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed by mechanical or high pressure water devices. 
(1)  Automatic car wash means a car wash where the labor is not supplied by the patron. 
(2)  Coin operated car wash means a car wash where the patron supplies the labor. 
City: The City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
City council: The City Council of Clarkston, Georgia. 
Club: Buildings and facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association of persons for social or recreational purposes, but not operated primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Comprehensive plan: A policy guideline including the future development map adopted by the mayor and council representing issues, goals, policies, and actions for the growth and development of the city. While adopted by the mayor and council, it does not serve as a development ordinance nor does it carry the force of law, but rather serves as a guide to desired and/or continued growth and development citywide. 
Conditional use: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use would not be detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare. Such uses may be required to meet additional standards and may be controlled as to the number, area and spacing from other uses and each other. 
Condominium: Individual ownership units in a multi-family residential, commercial, and/or industrial structure(s), combined with joint ownership of common areas and facilities. 
Convenience store: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
Cottage housing development: Planned unit developments comprised of cottage housing residential units, organized in clusters. Cottage housing is a style of small lot/home development designed for single-family dwelling, and is restricted in square footage, density, and architectural standards as defined within section 904. CHDs are characterized by a shared central open space. 
Customary home occupations: Any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is no group instruction, assembly or activity and no sign is used or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in any part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; there is no commodity stored on the premises or held for sale to the public from the premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises and no mechanical or electronic equipment is used for commercial purposes. 
Density: The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land. The standard for density shall be the gross density which includes all the land within the boundaries of the area excluding floodplains, wetlands and standing bodies of water. 
Developed floor area: The enclosed areas of a building that are heated or cooled. 
Development: The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
Driveway: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding and lodging houses. 
Dwelling, multiple family: A building designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, and doing their cooking in the said building. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building containing but one (1) housekeeping unit designed to be occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building containing not more than two (2) kitchens, designed to be occupied by not more than two (2) families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one (1) or more persons living as a family. 
Easement: An incorporeal interest in land owned and legally titled by another, permitting its limited use or enjoyment on, over, or under said land without actual occupancy. 
Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also include the painting of wall signs. 
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity. 
Family: One (1) or more related persons or four (4) or less unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean fraternity, sorority, club, student center, group care homes, foster homes and is to be distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, or apartment unit as herein defined. 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
Floodplain: That area within the intermediate regional flood contour elevations subject to periodic flooding as designated by the DeKalb County Roads and Bridges Director based upon the U.S. Corps of Engineers' Floodplain Information Reports and other federal, state or county hydraulic studies. 
Floor area: The total area of all floors of a building as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, excluding attached garages, porches, balconies and unfinished basements. 
Floor area ratio (FAR): A mathematical expression determined by dividing the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located as: Floor area/Lot area = Floor area ratio. 
Frontage: The length of any property line of a premises which abuts public rights-of-way. 
Future development map: Adopted as part of the comprehensive plan, the future development map establishes future development areas in the City of Clarkston. The intent for future land use and development in each area is established by supporting text in the comprehensive plan. 
Garage apartment: An accessory or subordinate building, not a part of or attached to the main building where a portion thereof contains living facilities for not more than one (1) family and the enclosed space for at least one (1) automobile is attached to such living quarters. 
Garage, commercial: A commercial structure or any portion thereof in which one (1) or more automobiles are housed, or kept or repaired; not including exhibition or showrooms or storage of cars for sale. 
Garage, private residential: A structure which is accessory to a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. 
Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
Gross leasable area (GLA): The total gross floor area within building(s) which is occupied exclusively by individual tenants and upon which the tenants pay rent. 
Guest cottage: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises as the main building to be used exclusively for housing members of the family occupying the main building and their non-paying guests; such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not to be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Hotel or motel: Any building or group of buildings containing principally sleeping rooms in which transient guests are lodged with or without meals with payment on a daily or weekly basis. 
Junkyard: Property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk, including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Landfill: See "sanitary landfill." 
Landscaping: The installation and permanent maintenance of trees, shrubs, ground covers, mulch, grass and other planting materials. 
Landscape strip: A ground area installed with landscape materials such as street trees, shrubs, ground cover, etc. (Paving material such as gravel and concrete pavers may be used in combination with plant material.) 
Laundry, self-service: A business rendering a retail service by renting to the individual customer equipment for the washing, drying and otherwise processing laundry, with such equipment to be serviced and its use and operation supervised by the management, and does not include processing the laundry by the management on behalf of the customer. 
LCI Study: Refers to the City of Clarkston Livable Centers Initiative Study (2004). 
Livestock: Any animal with hooves, including but not limited to, cattle, horses, goats, mules, pigs, and sheep. 
Loading space, off-street: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to the size of delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
Lot: A portion or parcel of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
Corner lot: A lot fronting on two (2) streets or their intersection, provided that the interior angle formed by the intersection is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. When the frontage on one (1) street exceeds the frontage on the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. 
Interior lot: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Through lot: An "interior lot" having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot depth: The distance measured in a mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite rear line of the lot. 
Lot of record: A part of land subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the front building line. 
Modular home: A modular home is a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Mixed-use development: Development projects that incorporate new residential and non-residential (commercial, community facility and light industrial) uses and are permitted as-of-right in certain zoning districts. 
Official zoning map: A legally adopted map that conclusively shows the location and boundaries of zoned districts. 
Open space: An open, unoccupied, unobstructed space that provides a usable amenity area on the same lot as a building. Required yards and requirements for sidewalk zones and landscape zones which are constructed on private property may be counted towards this requirement. Open space may also include balconies, roof-top terraces, front yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails and paths, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, and similar features which are located on private property. Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular access. 
Outdoor storage: The location of any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, junk, debris or any other item outside of a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than twenty-four (24) hours. 
Parking lot: An area or plot of ground used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles either for compensation or to provide an accessory service to a business, industrial or residential use. 
Permitted use: Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Pervious paving: A surface that allows water to pass through voids in or between paving materials while providing a stable, load bearing surface for vehicles. 
Planned unit development (PUD): A provision that allows more flexibility to development projects that incorporate two (2) or more buildings on a tract or several tracts of land than would otherwise be allowed by the underlying zoning district regulations. The following types of PUDs are allowed by this ordinance: Planned residential developments; cottage housing developments, and planned mixed-use developments; planned commercial development. 
Planning and zoning board: Refers to the planning and zoning board of the City of Clarkston as described in Chapter 15 of the Clarkston Code of Ordinances. 
Poultry. Any domesticated fowl whether kept for the production of eggs, meat, feathers, or otherwise. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants: Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by the city or other public agency. 
Restaurant, carry-out: A building or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the building. 
Restaurant, dine-in: A retail establishment where food and beverages are offered for sale to the public for either on-site consumption or for carry out to consume off-site. 
Restaurant, drive-through: Any restaurant where all or a portion of the business activity is dedicated serving customers by way of a drive-through window that allows customers to be served while inside an automobile. 
Retail services: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries. 
Retail trade: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public and for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses. 
Sanitary landfill: An area of land utilized for sanitary disposal by filling with solid waste refuse and garbage, then covering with layers of earth. 
Setback: The required space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Sidewalk clear zone: An unobstructed walkway with a minimum width of seven (7) feet and hardscaped located between the building face and landscape zone. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above. Attic or daylight basement space is construed as one-half (½) story. A fully underground basement is not a story. 
Street: A thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street grade: The establishment grade of the front street or other higher street upon which the lot abuts at the midpoint of the frontage of the plot thereon. 
Street line or highway margin: The dividing line between a lot, tract or plot of land and a contiguous street, road or highway right-of-way. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Structural alterations: Any change, except for repair or replacement, in the supporting members of a building such as load-bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists or roof joists. 
Structural trim: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to any structure, including signs. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale, lease, legacy or building development; it includes all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access (whether private or public) or change in an existing street, and includes re-subdivision. Subdivision is also the process (and the result) of dividing a parcel of raw land into smaller buildable sites, blocks, streets, open space and public areas and the designation of the location of utilities and other improvements. 
Temporary housing: Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities systems and which is not on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Threshold, front door: Establishes location of new residential construction for purposes of controlling proportion of mass and building height to lot size. 
Variance: A grant of relief that modifies the strict dimensional or numerical requirements of this ordinance to permit construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Code. A variance from the terms of this ordinance may be granted per criteria established here within and provided that the variance not be contrary to the public interest. 
Yard: An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of corners, all sides of the building facing the street are considered the front. 
Yard, rear: An open space not including parking on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 4(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 396, § 24, 7-5-16 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 4(Attach.) repealed former Art. IV in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, 4-23-2007; Ord. No. 341, § 1, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 367, § 1, 8-9-12. 

ARTICLE V. - PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.) repealed former Art. V, §§ 501—508, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted April 23, 2007. 

Sec. 501. - Official zoning map. 
The City of Clarkston is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this zoning ordinance. 
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Clarkston zoning ordinance" together with the date of adoption of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 502. - Reserved. 
Sec. 503. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the mayor and city council may by zoning ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted the date of (date) _____________ as part of the Clarkston zoning ordinance." 
Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 504. - Reserved. 
Sec. 505. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 506. - Conversion of previous zoning district designations. 

 
(Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 507. - Reserved. 
Sec. 508. - Future development areas and associated zoning districts. 
Zoning districts that are compatible and acceptable within the future development areas as set forth in the City of Clarkston comprehensive plan shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 375, § 5(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 601. - General provisions. 
The regulations set by this zoning ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
No building, structure, land, or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, re-constructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 602. - ADA compliance. 
In addition to the regulations of this zoning ordinance, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines for buildings and facilities shall also apply. 
Sec. 603. - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses shall be permitted as provided in this section. 
(a)  Accessory uses for commercial development shall include those normally appurtenant to such development, as provided for in other sections of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Any accessory use normally appurtenant to a permitted use shall be allowed provided such use shall conform with all performance standards set forth for that district. 
(c)  Such structures and uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which they are accessory. 
(d)  Such structures and uses shall not be permitted in a required front or side yard. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for gain. 
(f)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
(g)  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot in a residential district, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the rear property line. 
(h)  No garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than three (3) feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(i)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(j)  Residential sheds, workshops, greenhouses or other such accessory structures shall be located in a rear yard, are limited to one (1) story and shall not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet in size. 
(k)  In all zoning districts, no accessory use shall be permitted in public rights-of-way except mailboxes, sidewalks, driveways, light posts, and decorative landscaping with the permission of the public works director. 
(l)  Accessory use swimming pools having a minimum depth of two (2) feet: 
(1)  Shall be permitted only upon written approval of the county health department to indicate compliance with applicable health department swimming pool regulations; 
(2)  Shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line; and 
(3)  Shall be completely enclosed with an adequate protective fence of not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(4)  Shall be enclosed by protective fence with appropriate closure. 
(m)  Accessory structures may not be used for residential purposes, except for accessory dwellings in conformance with subsection (n). 
(n)  Accessory dwellings. Where listed as a permitted accessory use in a district, an accessory structure may be constructed and used as a residential dwelling place if the structure and use comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Accessory Dwellings are only permitted on lots with single-family detached residential dwellings as the primary structure. 
(2)  Accessory dwellings must include their own independent code-compliant kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
(3)  Accessory dwellings shall be limited to one (1) such structure per qualified lot. 
(4)  Accessory Dwellings shall be located either beside or behind the principal building. No portion of an accessory building may be located in the front yard of the primary structure. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any provision of the zoning ordinance limiting the size of accessory structures generally, Accessory Dwellings shall be permitted to have a first floor (main floor) area of up to one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet or the area of the first floor of the primary residential structure on the same lot, whichever is smaller. 
(6)  The maximum permitted height for an Accessory Dwelling is eighteen (18) feet from the finished first floor height, except that, if the ridge of the accessory dwelling's roof is pitched with a minimum slope of six (6) to twelve (12), then the maximum roof height may extend up to twenty-five (25) feet. All parts of the roof extending above eighteen (18) feet from finished first floor height shall be so pitched. This provision is intended to allow Accessory Dwellings to be a maximum of one and one-half (1½) stories in height. 
(7)  Each accessory dwelling shall be provided with at least one (1) off-street parking space located on the same lot as the accessory dwelling. Such required parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile of standard dimensions, with room for opening doors and entering or leaving on both sides and with safe and convenient access to a public street or alley. The required accessory dwelling parking space shall be positioned in such a way that a standard sized automobile has the ability to ingress and egress from the space without moving another vehicle. 
(8)  Accessory dwellings shall comply with all applicable codes for residential buildings, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
( Ord. No. 417 , § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 604. - Child and personal care uses. 
Daycare nurseries, child care centers, kindergartens; and nursing, convalescent, or rest homes not used primarily for the treatment of contagious diseases, alcoholism, drug addiction, or mental illness shall meet all applicable state requirements and shall receive all necessary county board of health and state fire marshal approvals prior to issuance of a permit for construction and operation. Day nurseries and kindergartens shall have the following additional criteria: 
(a)  The lot on which such uses are established shall have access on a major or minor thoroughfare; 
(b)  There shall be not less than thirty (30) square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum enrollment; 
(c)  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height; and 
(d)  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading of children. 
Sec. 605. - Home occupations. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for certain types of restricted occupational uses within residential zoning districts. Such uses are restricted to those which: 
(1)  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
(2)  Are compatible with residential uses; and 
(3)  Do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(b)  In all residential zoning districts, any building used for residential occupancy may conduct a home occupation use provided that: 
(1)  The primary use of the unit is a dwelling; 
(2)  The following standards are complied with in full at all times: 
a.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be engaged and employed in such occupation, and the number of residents employed shall not exceed two (2); 
b.  No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be utilized except that which is necessarily, customarily, or ordinarily used for household or leisure purposes; 
c.  No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
d.  No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other restricted materials shall be used or stored on the premises; 
e.  There shall be no outside operations, storage, or display of materials or products; 
f.  No accessory buildings shall be used in connection with a home occupation, except for bona fide accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
g.  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises occurs, including the creation of a separate entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance exclusively for the business; 
h.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation; 
i.  No commodity shall be stocked or sold on the premises to the general public; 
j.  No process shall be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, or welfare; 
k.  Visitors, customers, or deliveries shall not exceed that normally and reasonably occurring for a residence and shall, under no circumstance, exceed more than two (2) business visitors an hour and eight (8) a day and not more than two (2) manufacturer or wholesaler direct deliveries of products or materials per week; 
l.  No on-street parking associated with the business shall be permitted; 
m.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation; 
n.  The home occupation shall be restricted to twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling and shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of floor area. Said home occupation use shall be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes; and 
o.  There shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity; 
(c)  In all non-residential zoning districts, any building used for residential occupancy may conduct business provided that: 
(1)  The home occupation shall not involve more than two (2) employees on site who do not live in the dwelling unit; 
(2)  A home occupation may include the office of a licensed health service practitioner, including a surgeon, dentist, dental surgeon, osteopathic physician, psychologist, or other medical practitioner licensed by the state, who receives and treats patients on the premises; 
(3)  A home occupation may include the office of a person engaged in a profession, including a lawyer, an accountant, and auditor, an engineer, an architect, a real estate agent, or another profession similar in character, who receives and consults with clients on the premises; and 
(4)  A home occupation may have a single sign indicating the name of the business mounted as a wall sign on the dwelling, secured to the primary residential use, and having an area of no more than two (2) square feet. 
( Ord. No. 417 , § 2, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 606. - Keeping of poultry and livestock. 
(a)  The keeping of livestock or poultry within the city shall be prohibited on any lot with an area of less than three (3) acres, except as otherwise set forth in this Appendix A. 
(b)  Every poultry or livestock kept within the city must be contained by fence, corral, coop, pen or similar means sufficient to prevent said poultry or livestock from leaving the lot upon which they are kept. 
(c)  Any structure, pen, corral or other building appurtenant to the keeping and raising of livestock must be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any property line. 
(d)  The keeping of livestock or poultry within the City shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations promulgated by the DeKalb County Health Department. 
(e)  The non-commercial keeping of poultry is permitted on lots with area less than three (3) acres pursuant to Article XIII or this Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 2, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 607. - Functional classification of streets. 
For purposes of this zoning ordinance, all of the streets, roads and highways in the City of Clarkston are classified according to the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Sec. 608. - Lot reduction prohibited. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per dwelling unit or other requirements of this zoning ordinance are not maintained. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this zoning ordinance. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
Sec. 609. - One principal residential building per lot. 
Only one (1) permitted principal use, and its authorized accessory uses(s), shall be authorized per lot, unless multiple or mixed uses are specifically authorized on the same lot elsewhere in this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 610. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of land and buildings are incompatible with existing and future development within the city limits of the City of Clarkston are prohibited in all districts. In addition, neither the mayor nor city council shall have the authority to grant variances or special exceptions for these prohibited uses. 
(a)  Packing, slaughtering, eviscerating and skinning; 
(b)  Poultry killing, plucking and dressing; 
(c)  Rendering of byproducts of slaughtering and killing animals or poultry; 
(d)  Yards for the sale, transfer or temporary holding of livestock; 
(e)  Use of equipment which causes off-site radio or television interference; 
(f)  Landfills and junkyards; and 
(g)  Outside storage on any property that is not customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or is not otherwise permitted by Article X. 
Sec. 611. - Removal of soil. 
No soil, mineral, or similar material may be removed from any lot except that which is purely incidental to construction of a building or structure. No excavation on any lot exceeding one (1) foot in depth, except for the purpose of locating poles, or underground service connections of public utilities shall be permitted unless a building permit is first secured. 
Sec. 612. - Requirements for moving a building. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be relocated within the city unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of this zoning ordinance and other City Code requirements, and prior to the transportation of the structure, the relocation has been approved by the City of Clarkston. 
Sec. 613. - Sight obscuring container enclosures. 
Trash and recycling dumpsters must be enclosed on three (3) sides by a decorative wall or opaque fence. The height shall be equal to or higher than the trash or recycling dumpster. Pursuant to section 5-44 of this Code of Ordinances, temporary construction trash and recycling dumpsters which are not enclosed shall be permitted up until such time as the certificate of occupancy is granted. 
Sec. 614. - Street frontage requirement. 
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
In the event a land locked lot exists, as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance, the property owner shall be entitled to only one (1) building permit, provided; 
(a)  No other principal building exists or is being constructed on said property; 
(b)  No other valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance and is currently valid; 
(c)  The property was and continues to be under single ownership since the effective date of this zoning ordinance; 
(d)  The property owner has acquired a twenty (20) foot access easement to a publicly maintained street, and said easement has been duly recorded and made part of the property deed; and 
(e)  In the event said property is divided, no additional permits will be issued. 
Sec. 615. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance, which has an area or width which is less than required by this zoning ordinance, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Adjoining lots. When two (2) or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application, and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots shall be re-platted so as to create one (1) or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage requirements of the district. This shall not apply to lots within a development approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  Lots not meeting minimum lot size requirements. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the effective date of this zoning ordinance, such lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located provided that all other requirements of this zoning ordinance are met. In no case shall any substandard lot in a residential district be subdivided. 
(c)  In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards, the mayor and city council are hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five (5) feet in width. 
Sec. 616. - Temporary buildings during construction. 
A temporary building, buildings, or signs for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. 
Sec. 617. - Unsafe buildings. 
Nothing in this zoning ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
Sec. 618. - Utilities location. 
Electrical transformer stations, telephone exchanges and gas regulating stations, may be located in any zoning district subject to compliance with the following conditions and requirements and approval by the mayor and city council. 
(a)  Such facilities shall be essential for service to the area in which located or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the same is a part. 
(b)  Such facility shall be enclosed by a woven wire fence or similar opaque structure not less than ten feet (10) feet high. 
(c)  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be setback not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line, and shall meet all other applicable yard requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  Open spaces on the premises shall be suitably landscaped and maintained, and a planted buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be located along the side and rear property lines. 
(e)  When such facilities are located within any residential district, the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(f)  The area surrounding such a facility shall not be adversely affected by, and shall be protected from, noise, odor, glare, dust, fumes, gas, smoke, vibration, or any other obnoxious characteristics. 
Sec. 619. - Vision clearance at intersections. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three (3) feet and fifteen (15) feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks, shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of rights-of-way lines of streets, highways and railroads. Streets without right-of-way shall be measured from the driving surface or curb at the intersection. 
Sec. 620. - Yard and other spaces. 
Any building, structure or use hereafter erected, altered or established shall comply with the yard space requirements of the district in which it is located. The required yard space for any building, structure, or use shall be contained on the same zoning lot as the building, structure or use and such required yard space shall fall entirely upon land in a district or districts in which the principal use is permitted. 
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading spaces required for any one building shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided for herein. 
Sec. 621. - Residences, libraries, parks, and churches in proximity to businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No public library or public park shall be a permitted use within any zoning district of the city if the public library or public park lies on the same side of the street and is within one hundred (100) yards of the place of entrance of any business licensed to sell spirituous liquors pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Clarkston, Georgia; 
(b)  No church, chapel, mortuary, or other place used primarily for religious services shall be a permitted use in any zoning district if such church, chapel, mortuary, or other place used primarily for religious services lies within one hundred (100) yards of the entrance of a place of business licensed to sell spirituous liquors pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Clarkston, Georgia. 
(c)  For the purposes of this ordinance, measurement shall be from the closest property line of the public library, public park, church, chapel, or mortuary, or other place used for religious services and the point of entrance of the business licensed to sell spirituous liquors as measured along the most direct route. 
Sec. 622. - Permitted encroachments upon required setbacks. 
The following setback encroachments are permitted in all zoning districts: 
(a)  Cornices, eaves, chimneys, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side and rear yard provided such extensions do not exceed three (3) feet. 
(b)  Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks provided such extensions do not exceed ten (10) feet for the front yard, three (3) feet for the side yard and no closer than ten (10) feet from the property line in the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 6, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 623. - Open space. 
The following provisions shall apply to all "open space" required by the Clarkston Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  Open space requirement. 
(1)  Required yards and, sidewalk zones and landscape zones which are constructed on private property may be counted towards this requirement. 
(2)  Open space may also include balconies, roof-top terraces, front yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails and paths, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, and similar features which are located on private property. 
(3)  Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular access. 
(4)  Where open space is held in common ownership, covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of the open space; method of and responsibility for maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and assessment provisions; and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the open space criteria are maintained. 
(b)  Open space implementation and maintenance. 
(1)  Implementation. All open space including buffers, setbacks, sidewalk clear zones, sidewalk zones and open spaces shall be fully implemented prior to occupancy and if not completed, the occupancy permit shall not be issued. 
(2)  Maintenance. The owner shall provide adequate maintenance of the opens space improvements for a minimum of one (1) year from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The city shall inspect landscape improvements at least once during this period to ensure that the approved plan has been fully implemented and maintained. When a private property owner provides landscaping within the public right-of-way and the landscaping dies within a one-year period, such landscaping shall be replaced within a reasonable time not to exceed six (6) months for planting by the owner at the owner's sole expense. 
(c)  Relocation of open space. Relocation of minimum open space requirements: At the option of the property owner, up to fifty (50) percent of a development's required open space may be relocated to an offsite location provided: 
(1)  The city council has reviewed and approved the transfer request; 
(2)  A written agreement among all owners of record shall be provided with the request and held on file with the city clerk. All renewed or terminated leases shall be filed.with the city clerk. 
(3)  The receiving site(s) is designated an open space site in the comprehensive development plan; 
(4)  The receiving site(s) is located within three thousand (3,000) linear feet of the donating property; 
(5)  The receiving site(s) contains the required amount of open space; and 
(6)  Designated open space sites shall comply with the following: 
a.  The open space shall provide active or passive recreational amenities; 
b.  The open space shall be no greater than twenty-four (24) inches above or below the adjacent public sidewalk for a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from the beginning of the adjacent sidewalk; 
c.  The open space shall be visible and accessible from any point along ninety (90) percent of any adjacent sidewalk; and 
d.  The open space shall permit and encourage pedestrians to walk on a minimum of eighty (80) percent of the surface of the parcel excluding fountains, pedestrian furniture, public art and similar elements. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 7, 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.) adopted Oct. 1, 2013, repealed former Art. VII, §§ 701—713 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, 4-23-07; Ord. No. 331, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-08. 

Sec. 701. - NR-1, low-density neighborhood residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NR-1 zoning district is intended primarily for single-family detached residences and residentially-compatible requiring greater amounts of open space. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential dwellings. 
(2)  Non-commercial horticulture and agriculture, outside of front-and-side-yard setbacks. 
(3)  Accessory structures and uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations. 
(4)  Accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(d)  Accessory structures/uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(4)  Accessory structures greater than fifteen (15) feet in height, but less than thirty-five (35) feet in height, must be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side property line, and must be set back from the rear property line a distance of thirty (30) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is less. 
(5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
(7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five (5) feet into the required rear or side setback. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a wood fence at least six (6) feet in height. The city planner may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. 
(2)  Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: Not applicable in this district. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 417 , § 3, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 702. - NR-2, medium-density neighborhood residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NR-2 zoning district is intended for single-family detached residences on smaller lots where large amounts of open space are not required and/or desired. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential dwellings. 
(2)  Non-commercial horticulture and agriculture, outside of front-and-side-yard setbacks. 
(3)  Accessory structures and uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations. 
(4)  Accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(d)  Accessory structures/uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(4)  Accessory structures greater than fifteen (15) feet in height, but less than thirty-five (35) feet in height, must be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side property line, and must be set back from the rear property line a distance of thirty (30) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is less. 
(5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
(7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five (5) feet into the required rear or side setback. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a wood fence at least six (6) feet in height. The city planner may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. 
(2)  Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer Requirements: Not applicable in this district. 
Sec. 703. - NR-3, high-density neighborhood residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NR-3 zoning district is intended for single-family and multi-family residences at a greater density on smaller lots in order to provide for a variety of housing types, including townhomes, cluster homes and condominiums. This district may also serve as a transitional zone between light commercial/office uses and districts reserved for lower density single-family uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multi-family residential dwellings. 
a.  Duplexes. 
b.  Triplexes. 
(3)  Townhomes, provided: 
a.  For all developments containing eight (8) units or more, a mandatory homeowners association shall be created that will be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of all front yards and common areas including all fencing, landscaping, amenities and buffers, and shall include architectural control oversights for the development. 
b.  The development shall be constructed and governed in conformity with the requirements of the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). A declaration of condominium shall be submitted and recorded in compliance of this act. 
c.  All townhouses shall have two-car garages, and the parking pads/driveway in front of the garage shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length in order to accommodate two (2) additional cars. The garages shall be used for the parking and storage of vehicles and may not be enclosed to provide for additional residential space. A recital of this requirement shall be contained within the covenants to ensure enforcement. 
d.  A guest parking area shall be provided at a ratio of two-tenths (0.2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
e.  A recreation area shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) acre per fifty (50) units (or a proportional percentage thereof) with a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet provided. Such area shall be developed with at least one (1) passive recreational feature, such as a walking trail, pavilion, gazebo or picnic area, and at least one (1) active recreational feature, such as a swimming pool, playground or tennis courts. Active recreational areas must be outside of any floodplain area and located in such a manner that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the townhouses are within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the building footprints. All recreation areas must meet ADA requirements for accessibility. 
(4)  Accessory structures and uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations. 
(5)  Accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(d)  Accessory structures/uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(4)  Accessory structures greater than fifteen (15) feet in height, but less than thirty-five (35) feet in height, must be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side property line, and must be set back from the rear property line a distance of thirty (30) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is less. 
(5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed five (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
(7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach five (5) feet into the required rear or side setback. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a wood fence at least six (6) feet in height. The city planner may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. 
(2)  Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
(3)  Minimum parking provided shall be two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When attached single-family housing, duplex or triplex housing directly abuts the NR-1 or NR-2 districts, a twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 417 , § 5, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 704. - NR-CD, neighborhood residential-community development district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NR-CD zoning district is primarily intended for multi-family housing developments. However, the district allows for a mix of housing types, including single-family attached and detached structures, as well as some limited institutional and personal service uses that would be convenient to nearby residents. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Multi-family residential dwellings. 
a.  Apartments. 
b.  Condominiums. 
(2)  Multi-family residential dwellings. 
a.  Duplexes. 
b.  Triplexes. 
(3)  Townhomes, provided: 
a.  For all developments containing eight (8) units or more, a mandatory homeowners association shall be created that will be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of all front yards and common areas including all fencing, landscaping, amenities and buffers, and shall include architectural control oversights for the development. 
b.  The development shall be constructed and governed in conformity with the requirements of the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). A declaration of condominium shall be submitted and recorded in compliance of this act. 
c.  All townhouses shall have two-car garages, and the parking pads/driveway in front of the garage shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length in order to accommodate two (2) additional cars. The garages shall be used for the parking and storage of vehicles and may not be enclosed to provide for additional residential space. A recital of this requirement shall be contained within the covenants to ensure enforcement. 
d.  A guest parking area shall be provided at a ratio of two-tenths (0.2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
e.  A recreation area shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) acre per fifty (50) units (or a proportional percentage thereof) with a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet provided. Such area shall be developed with at least one (1) passive recreational feature, such as a walking trail, pavilion, gazebo or picnic area, and at least one (1) active recreational feature, such as a swimming pool, playground or tennis courts. Active recreational areas must be outside of any floodplain area and located in such a manner that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the townhouses are within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the building footprints. All recreation areas must meet ADA requirements for accessibility. 
(4)  Single-family detached residential dwellings. 
(5)  Boarding and rooming houses, except halfway houses. 
(6)  Child care/daycare centers, pre-schools and similar establishments. 
(7)  Assisted living, personal care, nursing and convalescent homes, and similar uses. 
(8)  Accessory structures and uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations. 
(9)  Accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(d)  Accessory structures/uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(4)  Accessory structures greater than fifteen (15) feet in height, but less than thirty-five (35) feet in height, must be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side property line, and must be set back from the rear property line a distance of thirty (30) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is less. 
(5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a wood fence at least six (6) feet in height. The city planner may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. 
(2)  Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
(3)  Minimum parking provided shall be two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a single-family attached or multi-family residential use in the NR-CD district directly abuts the NR-1 or NR-2 districts, a twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. When a non-residential use in the NR-CD district abuts a residential use in the NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 districts, a thirty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(2)  There shall be no buffer required between residential and non-residential uses contained wholly within the NR-CD district. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 417 , § 6, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 705. - RC, residential/commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The RC zoning district is intended to allow converted residential structures with commercial uses to coexist with residential uses. Commercial uses will be limited in order to maintain the current balance and aesthetic in the surrounding area. Residences converted to office uses are acceptable when kept at current scale. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential dwellings. 
(2)  Multi-family residential dwellings, including condominiums and apartment buildings consisting of at least four (4) individual units. 
(3)  Assisted living, personal care, nursing and convalescent homes, and similar uses. 
(4)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(5)  Child care/daycare centers, pre-schools and similar establishments. 
(6)  Professional offices, including medical doctors, dentists, attorneys, chiropractic, veterinary (without boarding), accountants/tax professionals and other similar occupations. 
(7)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, hair salons, nail salons and other similar uses. 
(8)  Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-thru/drive-in fast food establishments. 
(9)  Accessory structures and uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations (when applicable). 
(10)  Accessory dwellings in compliance with section 603(n). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a.  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b.  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c.  A minimum of one (1) parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
d.  The structure contains a minimum two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross heated floor area. 
(3)  Boarding and rooming houses, with a maximum of ten (10) beds per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of heated floor area. 
(d)  Accessory uses/structures: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  Any accessory building in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross space must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either fifteen (15) feet or the height of the principal building. 
(6)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(7)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
(2)  No uses which emit odors, fumes or continuous loud noise are permitted. 
(3)  No kennels are permitted within veterinary clinics. 
(4)  Building design and materials may be of the owner's choosing; however, structures which utilize metal siding shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering any facade of the building facing a roadway. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a single-family residential use in the RC district directly abuts the NC-2 or TC district, a twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(2)  There shall be no buffer required between residential and non-residential uses contained wholly within the RC district. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 417 , § 7, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 706. - NC-1, low-density neighborhood commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NC-1 zoning district is intended to provide suitable areas for limited retail and personal services serving residents in the immediate vicinity. Uses located within this district supply those goods and services which require frequent purchasing with a minimum of customer travel. The scope at which properties are developed within the NC-1 district should reflect their relatively small market areas. This zoning district may serve as a step down from more intense commercial uses to residential uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(2)  Child care/daycare centers, pre-schools and similar establishments. 
(3)  Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-thru/drive-in fast food establishments. 
(4)  Funeral homes (no on-site crematory services). 
(5)  Retail trade: Uses shall have no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. Appropriate uses include: 
(a)  Art stores/galleries. 
b.  Antique shops. 
c.  Book and video stores (non-adult oriented). 
d.  Camera shops. 
e.  Dry cleaners. 
f.  Florists. 
g.  Drug stores. 
h.  Gift shops. 
i.  Toy stores. 
j.  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
k.  Jewelry stores. 
l.  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
m.  Shoe stores. 
n.  Apparel stores. 
o.  Other similar and customary uses. 
(6)  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, jewelry, shoes and the like. 
(7)  Professional offices, including medical doctors, dentists, attorneys, chiropractic, veterinary (without boarding), accountants/tax professionals and other similar occupations. 
(8)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, hair salons, nail salons and other similar uses. 
(9)  Multi-family residential dwellings, including condominiums and apartment buildings consisting of at least four (4) individual units. 
(10)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations (when applicable). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  Any accessory building in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross space must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either fifteen (15) feet or the height of the principal building. 
(6)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(7)  Recycling collection/drop off centers. 
a.  No outside storage allowed. 
b.  Container bins and/or donation boxes are limited to rear or side yards and must be located in such a manner as to be screened from view from the public right-of-way. When a business is located on a corner lot, container bins and/or donation boxes must be placed to the rear or interior side of the property such that the location is not visible from the right-of-way of any street. 
c.  A maximum of one (1) container bin/donation box per property is allowed. 
d.  Container bins and/or donation boxes shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a structure utilized for detached single-family residential purposes. 
e.  Location of container bins and/or donation boxes must be approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence or wall no less than six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  No uses which emit odors, fumes or continuous loud noise are permitted (including manufacturing processes). 
(3)  No kennels are permitted within veterinary clinics. 
(4)  Building design and materials may be of the owner's choosing; however, structures which utilize metal siding shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering any facade of the building facing a roadway. 
(5)  All individual non-residential uses shall not exceed a maximum built floor area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a use within the NC-1 district directly abuts the NR-1, NR-2 or NR-3 district, a thirty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(h)  Temporary uses: Temporary uses if approved pursuant to section 313. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 707. - NC-2, moderate-density neighborhood commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The NC-2 zoning district is intended to provide suitable areas for the provision of retail and personal services oriented towards those neighborhoods making up the adjacent community. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation of compatible and economically healthy business and service uses which benefit from close proximity to each other. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(2)  Child care/daycare centers, pre-schools and similar establishments. 
(3)  Car washes. 
(4)  Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-thru/drive-in fast food establishments. 
(5)  Funeral homes (no on-site crematory services). 
(6)  Retail trade. Single uses shall have no more than twenty (20,000) square feet of gross floor area. Appropriate uses include: 
a.  Art stores/galleries. 
b.  Antique shops. 
c.  Book and video stores (non-adult oriented). 
d.  Camera shops. 
e.  Dry cleaners. 
f.  Florists. 
g.  Drug stores. 
h.  Gift shops. 
i.  Toy stores. 
j.  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
k.  Jewelry stores. 
l.  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
m.  Shoe stores. 
n.  Apparel stores. 
o.  Other similar and customary uses. 
(7)  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, jewelry, shoes and the like. 
(8)  Professional offices, including medical doctors, dentists, attorneys, chiropractic, veterinary, accountants/tax professionals and other similar occupations. 
(9)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, hair salons, nail salons and other similar uses. 
(10)  Tattoo parlors and piercing studios. 
(11)  Multi-family residential dwellings, including condominiums and apartment buildings consisting of at least four (4) individual units. 
(12)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations (when applicable). 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions, provided: 
a.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(2)  Automobile service stations and automotive repair centers (excluding paint and body), provided: 
a.  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines unless otherwise approved by the DeKalb County Fire Marshal. 
b.  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within fifteen (15) feet of any property line. 
c.  Automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d.  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  Any accessory building in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross space must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either fifteen (15) feet or the height of the principal building 
(6)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed feet (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(7)  Recycling collection/drop off centers. 
a.  No outside storage allowed. 
b.  Container bins and/or donation boxes are limited to rear or side yards and must be located in such a manner as to be screened from view from the public right-of-way. When a business is located on a corner lot, container bins and/or donation boxes must be placed to the rear or interior side of the property such that the location is not visible from the right-of-way of any street. 
c.  A maximum of one (1) container bin/donation box per property is allowed. 
d.  Container bins and/or donation boxes shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a structure utilized for detached single-family residential purposes. 
e.  Location of container bins and/or donation boxes must be approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence or wall no less than six (6) feet in height. Limited to twenty-five (25) percent of total lot area. 
(2)  No manufacturing process are permitted. 
(3)  Building design and materials may be of the owner's choosing; however, structures which utilize metal siding shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering any facade of the building facing a roadway. 
(4)  residential uses shall be located only directly above non-residential uses as part of the same structure. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a use within the NC-2 district directly abuts any residential use, a forty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(2)  There shall be no buffer requirement between adjacent residential and non-residential uses when both are located within the NC-2 district. 
(h)  Temporary uses: Temporary Uses if approved pursuant to section 313. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
Sec. 708. - TC, town center district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: 
(1)  Promote development of a compact, pedestrian-oriented town center consisting of a high-intensity employment center, vibrant and dynamic mixed-use areas; 
(2)  Promote a diverse mix of residential, business, commercial, office, institutional, cultural and entertainment activities for workers, visitors, and residents; 
(3)  Encourage bicycle and pedestrian-oriented development at densities and intensities that will help to support transit usage and town center businesses; 
(4)  Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction; 
(5)  Create a place that represents a unique, attractive, and memorable destination for visitors and residents; and 
(6)  Enhance the community's character through the promotion of high-quality urban design. 
(b)  General application: Design standards included in the town center district shall apply to new construction and redevelopment. Buildings undergoing alteration shall meet design standards to the extent practicable, as approved at a regular meeting of the planning and zoning board. 
(c)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Banks and credit unions. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a.  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b.  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c.  The structure contains a minimum two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross heated floor area. 
(3)  Child care/daycare centers, pre-schools and similar establishments. 
(4)  Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-through/drive-in establishments. 
(5)  Entertainment venues, including bowling alleys, movie theaters (non-adult oriented) and other similar and customary uses. 
(6)  Funeral homes (no on-site crematory services). 
(7)  Hotels. 
(8)  Retail trade: Uses shall have no more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area. Appropriate uses include: 
a.  Art stores/galleries. 
b.  Antique shops. 
c.  Apparel stores. 
d.  Book, music and video stores (non-adult oriented). 
e.  Bottle shops/package stores. 
f.  Camera shops. 
g.  Drug stores, excluding drive-through establishments. 
h.  Dry cleaners, excluding drive through establishments. 
i.  Electronics and appliance stores. 
j.  Florists. 
k.  Furniture and home furnishings. 
l.  Gift shops. 
m.  Grocery stores. 
n.  Jewelry stores. 
o.  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
p.  Shoe stores. 
q.  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
r.  Toy stores. 
s.  Other similar and customary uses. 
(9)  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, jewelry, shoes and the like. 
(10)  Professional offices, including accountants/tax professionals, attorneys, chiropractic, dentists, medical doctors, real estate, veterinary, and other similar occupations. 
(11)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, hair salons, nail salons and other similar uses. 
(12)  Tattoo parlors and piercing studios. 
(13)  Multi-family residential dwellings, provided that they are part of a mixed use building and not located on the ground floor. 
(14)  Mixed use buildings with any of the above listed uses on the first floor, except residential; and owner or renter occupied dwelling units, located above street level. 
(15)  Accessory uses incidental to any legal permitted use, including home occupations (when applicable). 
(d)  Prohibited uses: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishments but not limited to, adult bookstores, video or DVD adult rental or purchase, adult movie or adult live theaters, adult gifts and novelties, and other venues for viewing other adult entertainment through any other electronic or other technological medium. 
(2)  Automotive repair shops, dealerships and auto parts stores. 
(3)  Extended stay motels/hotels. 
(4)  Flea markets. 
(5)  Firearm dealers. 
(6)  Labor pools. 
(7)  Hookah bar and/or vape lounges within five hundred (500) feet of school, place of worship, public park or other hookah or vape establishment. 
(8)  Pawnshops. 
(9)  Title loan institutions. 
(10)  Any use of property not specifically allowed by section 708(c). 
(e)  Accessory structures: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and only in the side or rear yard of the principal use at least ten (10) feet from any lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  Any accessory structure in excess of six hundred (600) square feet of gross space must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
(4)  Building design and materials shall be consistent with design approved by planning and zoning board; however, structures which utilize metal siding shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering any facade of the building facing a roadway. 
(5)  No accessory structure shall be constructed or placed upon a lot before the principal building is constructed. 
(6)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either fifteen (15) feet or the height of the principal building. 
(7)  The area of the accessory structure's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(f)  Accessory use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence or wall no less than six (6) feet in height. Limited to twenty-five (25) percent of total lot area. 
(2)  Accessory uses must be permitted within the zoning district. 
(g)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
  
(h)  Setbacks: 
(1)  No minimum front building setback is required. 
(2)  The maximum front building setback may not exceed the average front yard depth of the nearest two (2) lots on either side of the subject lot or twelve (12) feet, whichever is less. 
a.  If one or more of the lots required to be included in the averaging calculation are vacant, such vacant lots will be deemed to have a yard depth of zero (0) feet 
b.  Lots fronting a different street than the subject lot or separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in determining the average. 
c.  When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average setback will be determined on the basis of the two (2) adjacent lots that front on the same street as the subject lot. 
d.  When the subject lot abuts a corner lot fronting on the same street, the average setback will be determined on the basis of the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots that front on the same street as the subject lot. 
(3)  The following exceptions to the maximum front building setbacks apply: 
a.  A portion of the building may be set back from the maximum setback line in order to provide an articulated façade or accommodate a building entrance feature, provided that the total area of the space created must not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage. 
b.  A building may be set back farther than the maximum setback in order to accommodate an outdoor eating area. In order to preserve the continuity of the streetwall, the building may be set back no more than twelve (12) feet from the front or street side property line or at least forty (40) percent of the building façade must be located at the maximum setback line. The total area of an outdoor eating area that is located between a public sidewalk and the building façade may not exceed 12 times the building's street frontage in linear feet. 
(4)  The minimum rear setback is ten (10) feet, or twenty (20) feet for TC-zoned properties that abut a single-family residential district. 
(5)  No interior side setbacks are required in the TC district, except when TC-zoned property abuts a single-family residential district, in which case the minimum side yard setback required in the TC district must be the same as required for a residential use on the abutting residential zoned lot. 
(i)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a use within the TC district abuts any single-family residential district, a ten-foot buffer shall be required. 
(j)  Temporary uses: Temporary uses if approved pursuant to section 313. 
(k)  Open space density bonus: Every one (1) square foot of additional open space provided in excess of the minimum open space requirement in section 708 (g)shall increase the maximum floor area for the development by ten (10) square feet. 
(l)  Building facades and entrances: 
(1)  Building facades shall be articulated to minimize the monotonous appearance of large buildings through the use of architectural elements such as recessed windows and entries, offset surfaces, differentiated piers and columns, offset planes, textured materials, or awnings, 
a.  Variations in facade treatment shall be continued throughout the structure, including its roof line and front and rear facades. 
b.  Blank lengths of wall exceeding thirty (30) linear feet are prohibited on all building facades. 
(2)  Delineation of building floors at the third story above sidewalk level and lower shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
(3)  A street address number shall be located directly above the primary building entrance, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(4)  The primary pedestrian access to all sidewalk level uses and business establishments with public or private street frontage: 
a.  Shall face and be visible from the public street when located adjacent to such street. When located adjacent to a street that functions as an arterial street or a collector street, said entrance shall face and be visible from such street. 
b.  Shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk adjacent to such street. 
c.  Shall remain unlocked during business hours for non-residential uses, including hotels and bed and breakfast inns. 
d.  Buildings on corner lots shall have an angled entrance oriented toward the intersection. 
(m)  Franchise architecture: Buildings where the proposed architecture is the result of "corporate" or franchise style shall be prohibited. New construction should provide variety and diversity and express its own uniqueness of structure, location or tenant. Buildings shall be consistent with the local architectural vernacular, establish a sense of permanence, and avoid over- commercialization. Building design shall reflect local, unique, and traditional designs rather than chain or franchise designs. 
(n)  Color: The overall exterior color scheme shall be included in the permit application as a colored depiction and shall be selected from the approved color palette and be harmonious with the neighborhood and blend with the natural surroundings of the site. Consideration shall be given to the compatibility of colors with those existing in the vicinity. The size of the structure and the amount of shading it will receive are also a factor in selection of colors. Examples of incompatible colors include day glow and metallic colors. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13; Ord. No. 396, §§ 1—14, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 709. - I, light industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent: The I zoning district is intended to provide suitable areas for business distribution/service facilities, transportation terminals and manufacturing/assembly processes which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, or odors from an enclosed building. These districts should have access to arterial roadways and utilities and discourage uses which are incompatible with light manufacturing. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, I-zoned properties should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Places of assembly, including religious institutions. 
(2)  Automobile, truck, motorcycle and heavy equipment sales/service/rental/parts/repair establishments. 
(3)  Automobile service stations and automotive service centers, including paint and body repair. 
(4)  Pet boarding/breeding kennels. 
(5)  Communications towers (cellular). 
(6)  Commercial dry cleaning plants. 
(7)  Entertainment venues, including bowling alleys, movie theaters (non-adult oriented) and other similar and customary uses. 
(8)  Fortune tellers, psychics and similar forms of personal entertainment. 
(9)  Funeral homes (no on-site crematory services). 
(10)  Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries. 
(11)  Hospitals. 
(12)  Manufacturing and assembly, provided no gas, fumes or odors are emitted as a result of the activity. 
(13)  Car washes. 
(14)  Mini-warehouses and self-storage facilities. 
(15)  Professional offices, including medical doctors, dentists, attorneys, chiropractic, veterinary, accountants/tax professionals and other similar occupations. 
(16)  Bottle shops/package stores. 
(17)  Research and experimental testing laboratories. 
(18)  Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-thru/drive-in fast food establishments. 
(19)  Non-automotive repair services such as cameras, jewelry, shoes and the like. 
(20)  Tattoo parlors and piercing studios. 
(21)  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
(22)  Trade shops, building and equipment supply/repair services, including: 
a.  Locksmiths 
b.  Gunsmiths 
c.  Sheet metal 
d.  Upholstering 
e.  Furniture 
f.  Appliance 
g.  Electrical 
h.  Carpentry 
i.  Sign manufacturing/assembly/repair 
j.  Other similar and customary uses 
k.  Wholesaling and warehousing with associated office and storage facilities 
(23)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, provided: 
a.  Retail sales and services must be conducted and accessed wholly within the building(s) housing the use to which the activities are accessory and comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area. 
b.  No show window or other advertising shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
(c)  Conditional uses: 
(1)  Adult entertainment, including massage parlors, adult video/book stores, gentleman's clubs and other similar uses. 
(2)  Crematories. 
(3)  Title loan businesses, pawn shops and similar establishments. 
(d)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least fifteen (15) feet from side or rear lot lines or within the side-or-rear-yard setback, whichever is greater. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
(2)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
(3)  Any accessory building in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross space must be at least ten (10) feet from any property line and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
(5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal building. 
(6)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed fifty (50) percent that of the principal structure. 
(7)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
(e)  Use limitations: 
(1)  All outdoor storage must be screened by an opaque fence no less than eight (8) feet in height. Maximum of fifty (50) percent of lot may be utilized for such use. 
(2)  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; however, structures which utilize metal siding shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering any facade of the building facing a roadway. 
(3)  Cellular telecommunications towers shall be located at a minimum distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from all residential dwellings. 
(f)  Bulk and area regulations: 

 
(g)  Buffer requirements: 
(1)  When a use within the I district abuts any residential district or use, a fifty-foot landscaped buffer shall be required. 
(2)  All loading docks shall be screened by either landscaping or a stabilized berm. 
(h)  Temporary uses: Temporary uses if approved pursuant to section 313. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 8(Attach.), 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 801. - Nonconforming uses. 
Within the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance or amendments that may be adopted later there might exist land, structures, and uses of land and structures in combination which were lawful before this zoning ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this zoning ordinance or future amendments. Such nonconforming uses are declared by this zoning ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is the intent of this zoning ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their continuance. 
Sec. 802. - General rule. 
To avoid undue hardship, the lawful use of any building, structure or land use at the time of enactment of this zoning ordinance may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this zoning ordinance except that the nonconforming building or land use shall not be: 
(a)  Changed to another nonconforming use. A change in tenancy or ownership shall not be considered a change to another nonconforming use, provided that the use itself remains unchanged. 
(b)  Reestablished after discontinuance of six (6) months or more. When a nonconforming use of a building, structure or land use is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months, the building, structure or land shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the existing zoning regulations of the district in which the building, structure or land is located. The provisions of this subparagraph shall operate to prohibit resumption of the nonconforming use after the specified time has elapsed, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon the right to use the building, structure or land use not in conformance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Major repairs, rehabilitation or alterations. A nonconforming building or structure that is repaired, rebuilt, or altered after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction for all uses shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. As an exception to this requirement, single-family detached uses shall be permitted after any damage to be repaired or rebuilt to the equivalent of its pre-damaged condition. Authorized reconstruction shall begin within one (1) year after damage is incurred. 
(d)  Enlargement or alteration. Enlarging, extending, altering or moving a building or structure that would increase its nonconformity shall not be allowed, except that a nonconforming use may be extended into an additional area of a building, structure or land use that existed at the time of passage or amendment of this zoning ordinance. No such nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building or structure. 
Also to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this zoning ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 803. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
Nonconforming lots of record are also known as substandard lots of record and their use is regulated by Article V of this zoning ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 901. - Purpose of planned unit developments. 
Planned unit developments encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than on a lot-by-lot basis. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. The city gains the advantages of variety in building types, compatibility of uses and optimum community development. Review of the development plan by the city provides an opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. 
(a)  Purpose and definition. Planned unit development is defined as two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a tract or several tracts of land of the minimum size established in section 903. The purpose of the planned unit development shall be to: 
(1)  Provide for unified approaches to the development of land; 
(2)  Provide for a simplified process of enabling development which would otherwise require numerous applications for variations from the provisions of the zoning code; 
(3)  Provide for the development of stable environments that are compatible with surrounding areas of the community; and 
(4)  Assure the provision of park and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development. 
(Ord. No. 358, §§ 1, 2, 3-1-11) 
Sec. 902. - Ownership control. 
(a)  All of the land in a planned unit development shall be owned initially by an individual, by a corporation or by some other legal entity until development of the project is complete. 
(b)  After the development is complete, as a precondition to obtaining certificate(s) of occupancy for building(s) in the planned unit development, the developer shall either: 
(1)  Record a final subdivision plat that creates a separate lot for each dwelling place and subjects each lot in the development to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the planned unit development as originally approved and developed and require maintenance of the common areas, if applicable, by the owners of the subdivided lots; or 
(2)  Record a condominium declaration pursuant to the Georgia Condominium Act. 
(c)  Common areas shall be required for four or more homes and owned by a condominium association, homeowners' association or jointly by the owners of the individual parcels within the planned development. 
( Ord. No. 414 , § 1, 8-2-17) 
Sec. 903. - Standards applying to all planned unit developments. 
All planned unit developments shall meet the following standards and such other requirements as are set forth with respect to each of the four (4) permitted types of planned unit developments: 
(a)  Types of planned unit developments. The following types of planned unit developments are authorized by this ordinance. They are required to have the minimum footage indicated. 
(1)  Planned residential developments: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Cottage housing developments: Eleven thousand six hundred sixteen (11,616) square feet. 
(3)  Planned mixed-use developments: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet on multiple parcels. 
(4)  Planned commercial development: Two (2) acres. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  The development shall utilize design and development features that would not be possible by the application of lot-by-lot zoning district regulations. 
(2)  Site planning. Site planning in the proposed planned unit development shall give consideration to the topography; it shall be compatible with the topography of the land and shall preserve any unusual and valuable natural features. 
(3)  The development shall not adversely affect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties; it should consider the location of structures, screening, setbacks and street design in the evaluation of the relationship of the development to its surrounding areas. 
(4)  Service and emergency access. Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting and other emergency equipment, service deliveries and refuse collection. 
(5)  Infrastructure. Provision shall be made for acceptable design and construction of storm sewers and stormwater retention facilities, as required by Chapter 19 of the City Code and by DeKalb County. Transportation and school facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development or there shall be a definite proposal for making them so. All planned developments are required to connect to city/county water and sewer system. 
(6)  Covenants. The planned unit development shall include such covenants and legal provisions as will assure conformity to the achievement of the plan 
(c)  Conformance with existing zoning. 
(1)  Location. Planned developments may be located in zoning districts as follows: 
a.  Planned residential developments may be located within the NR-2, NR-3, NR-CD and RC zoning districts. 
b.  Planned commercial developments may be located in the NC-1. NC-2, RC, and TC zoning districts. 
c.  Planned mixed use developments may be located in the NC-1, NC-2, NR-CD and TC zoning districts. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Only those uses permitted in the zoning district in which the proposed development is located shall be permitted in the planned unit development. 
(3)  Future development plan. Planned unit developments shall not violate the provisions of the future development plan. 
(4)  Height. The height limitations of the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located shall be met. 
(5)  Density. The maximum density of a planned residential development shall not exceed the density of the zoning district in which it is located. Cottage housing developments may attain the density as provided herein. 
(6)  Signs. Planned unit developments shall strictly comply with the signage provisions of Chapter 15.5 of the Clarkston City Code. 
(7)  Off-street parking requirements. The off-street parking requirements of this zoning ordinance shall be met. 
(8)  Yards. Along the exterior boundaries of a planned development, no yard shall be less than five (5) feet in width and buffer requirements of this ordinance shall be met. 
(9)  Common open space requirements. The open space requirements for the underlying district shall be met. 
( Ord. No. 414 , § 2, 8-2-17) 
Sec. 904. - Standards for cottage housing developments (CHD). 
The following regulations apply to cottage housing developments (CHDs): 
(a)  CHDs are allowed in the following zoning districts: Medium Density Neighborhood Residential (NR-2); High Density Neighborhood Residential (NR-3), Neighborhood Residential-Community Development (NR-CD) and Residential-Commercial (RC). 
(b)  The following requirements shall apply to all CHDs: 
(1)  Density and minimum lot area. 
a.  In CHDs, the permitted density shall be one (1) dwelling unit per two thousand nine hundred four (2,904) square feet of lot area (fifteen (15)/acre). 
b.  The minimum lot area for a CHD shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
c.  Cottage homes shall be developed in clusters of a minimum of two (2) homes to a maximum of twelve (12) homes. 
(2)  Height limit and roof pitch. 
a.  The height limit permitted for structures in CHDs shall be eighteen (18) feet from the finished first floor height, subject to the exception described in subsection (b). 
b.  Where the ridge of a roof is pitched with a minimum slope of six (6) to twelve (12), the maximum roof height may extend up to twenty-five (25) feet. All parts of the roof above eighteen (18) feet shall be pitched. These heights are intended to allow maximum one and one-half (1½) story homes. 
(3)  Lot coverage and floor area. The maximum first floor or main floor area for an individual principal structure in a CHD shall be one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
(4)  Yard setbacks. 
a.  Front yard setbacks. When fronting a public street, the front yard setback shall be at least fifteen (15) feet with an allowable seven (7) foot encroachment for a front porch. On non-public streets, the front yard setback shall be at least ten (10) feet with an allowable encroachment for a front porch of no greater than five (5) feet. 
b.  Rear yards. The minimum rear yard shall be ten (10) feet. 
(5)  Required open space. 
a.  A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet per unit of common open space is required. 
b.  At least fifty (50) percent of the cottage units shall abut the common open space. 
c.  All of the cottage units shall be located within one-hundred (100) feet walking distance of the common open space. 
d.  The common open space shall have cottages abutting at least two (2) sides. 
e.  At least fifty (50) percent of the cottage home units shall be oriented around the common open space with their covered porches or main entry facing the common open space. 
(6)  Parking. Parking spaces for each cottage home unit shall be provided as follows; 
a.  Units that exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet on main floor: two (2) spaces. Units that do not exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet on main floor: one and one half (1.5) spaces. 
b.  Location. Parking shall be located on the CHD property. It may be located in a structure, under a structure, or outside a structure provided that: 
(i)  Parking is screened from direct view from street by one or more building facades, by garage doors, or by a fence and landscaping; 
(ii)  Parking is not located in the front yard; 
(iii)  Parking is only allowed between structures when it is located toward the rear of the principal structure and is served by an alley or private driveway; 
(iv)  Parking may be located between any structure and the rear lot line of the lot or between any structure and a side lot line which is not a street side lot line. 
(7)  Additional requirements. 
a.  Cottage homes shall have a covered porch at least sixty (60) square feet in size. 
b.  All structures shall maintain ten (10) feet of separation between houses. 
c.  The condominium association or home owners' association shall maintain the required open space and all common areas. 
d.  Each cottage home shall have access to clothes washers and dryer facilities, either through installation of connections to clothes washers and dryers in the cottage home, or access to clothes washers and dryers in a building located in the common open space. 
e.  Developers of cottage homes are encouraged to provide pervious parking areas. In any event, every cottage home development shall comply with Chapter 22 of the Clarkston City Code regarding stormwater management. 
(c)  Other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to sections 608 and 609, shall be construed to permit cottage housing development in conformance with this section. Lots may be reduced in size, as would otherwise be prohibited by section 608, in order to develop cottage housing in compliance with sections 901 through 906. 
( Ord. No. 414 , § 3, 8-2-17) 
Sec. 905. - Standards applying to construction, development, and maintenance of planned developments. 
(a)  General private deed covenants. The entire planned development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with approved plans and development. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a copy of the recorded legal covenants has been submitted to the city. 
(b)  Phased development projects. PUD applicants may propose construction phases (commencement and completion dates) for a planned residential development project that has identified, logical geographical sections or pods; a construction phasing plan shall be reviewed by the city zoning and review commission and the mayor and city council for approval. 
(c)  Performance bonds required. The landowner shall furnish such bond or bonds as may be recommended to the city council by the zoning and review commission and approved by the mayor and city council to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the planned development plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion. 
(d)  Open space maintenance. In event the property owners' association for a planned residential or cottage housing development fails to maintain the common open space property, the city may serve written notice upon the property owners' association and upon the residents and owners of the planned development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within thirty (30) days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice. 
(1)  If the deficiencies are not corrected within said thirty (30) days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned development and to prevent the common open space from be coming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open spaces and maintain the same for one (1) year and thereafter until the property owners' association is prepared to provide proper maintenance. 
(2)  The cost of such maintenance by the city shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the planned residential or cottage development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a tax lien upon said properties. The city at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the county tax assessor upon the properties affected by such lien within the planned residential development. 
Sec. 906. - Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed in the establishment of a planned unit development. 
(a)  Optional pre-application meeting. Prior to the submittal of a planned development application, the applicant may meet with the designated city planner for a preliminary conference on the location, scope and nature of the proposed development. A written report on the pre-application meeting shall be prepared and transmitted to the applicant and to the mayor and city council for their information. 
(b)  Formal application and completeness check. A formal application for a planned development shall be made by the applicant to the city clerk. 
(1)  Required information. The applicant shall submit the following information and such other materials as the planning and zoning board and mayor and city council may require to determine whether the proposed development meets the required standards. 
a.  Plans in accordance with the requirements of section 302 of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Other applicable information regarding the relation of the proposed development to surrounding development and roads, as well as common open space proposed on the site. 
c.  A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and continued financing of a property owners' association except in commercial planned unit developments. 
d.  Any statistical tabulations required to show that the proposed development meets the specific requirements of the proposed planned unit development. 
e.  If the proposed planned unit development is to be subdivided, then the application for approval of the planned unit development shall include all information required for the preliminary approval of a subdivision under chapter 17, subdivision regulations, of the City Code. 
(2)  Completeness check. The city clerk or designated city planner shall review the application for completeness. Once certified complete, the application shall be transmitted to the planning and zoning board for review and recommendation to the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Plan review and approval criteria. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the formal application and all required information, the application shall be reviewed by the designated city planner who shall prepare a staff report and the application shall be added to the next appropriate planning and zoning board agenda; the planning and zoning board shall review the proposed development for conformance to this ordinance and for achievement of the purposes of this section and shall make a written recommendation for approval or disapproval to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Failure to act. If the planning and zoning board fails to submit a report within thirty (30) days after it has received the proposed planned development application, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval to the mayor and city council. The planning and zoning board and the applicant may jointly agree to a thirty-day postponement, provided that notice of such agreement shall be sent to the mayor and city council. In any case, all materials concerning the proposed planned unit development shall be forwarded to the mayor and city council no later than sixty (60) days from the receipt of an application certified as complete. 
(d)  City council hearing and final action. At the next regularly scheduled meeting after the zoning and review commission has conducted an application review and recommendation, the mayor and city council shall review and consider the proposed application and materials for a public hearing. 
(1)  If the proposed planned unit development is deemed acceptable for further consideration, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. The notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing in the official legal organ of the city or in the official legal organ of DeKalb County. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(2)  In addition, the city shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property involved a sign which shall contain information as to the planned unit development applied for and time and place of the hearing. Failure to erect and maintain the sign as specified above shall not invalidate the subsequent determination of the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing the mayor and city council shall approve or deny the planned unit development. The mayor and city council and the applicant may jointly agree to postpone action for a forty-five-day period but the final decision shall be made not later than sixty (60) days from the public hearing. 
(e)  General standards for approval. Planned unit developments may be approved subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. The following general standards shall be considered in determining whether the planned unit development shall be approved: 
(1)  Is the proposed development suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(2)  Does the proposed development adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(3)  Does the proposed development result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools? 
(4)  Are there other existing or changing conditions which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community give supporting grounds for either the approval or denial of the proposed development? 
(f)  Preliminary and final land subdivision plats. Final approval of the planned unit development by the mayor and city council authorizes the applicant to prepare a preliminary land subdivision plat when applicable. A copy of this authorization together with a copy of the materials submitted by the applicant shall be sent to the planning and zoning board. 
(1)  No site development shall be undertaken by the applicant and no permits shall be issued to him/her until the preliminary land subdivision plat has been officially approved by the planning and zoning board and the mayor and city council in accordance with the Clarkston land subdivision regulations (chapter 17 of the City Code). 
(2)  A final land subdivision plat shall be prepared by the developer after approval of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  If the final land subdivision plat meets the requirements of subdivision regulations of the city, it shall be approved by the zoning and review commission and the mayor and city council and recorded in accordance with land subdivision regulation procedures. 
(g)  Modification of approved planned unit developments: The mayor or his/her designee shall have sole authority to approve minor changes to approved planned unit developments. For the purposes of this section, a minor change in the approved planned unit development means a slight alteration to a planned unit development or change in layout that does not result in the visible intrusion of any building, structure, driveway, walkway, parking lot, plaza, wall or similar built element into any open space, yard, landscaped buffer, undeveloped space, or any similar space, when any such space is shown on the final "conditional" plan as being next to and visible from a property line or street. 
(Ord. No. 358, §§ 1, 2, 3-1-11) 
ARTICLE X. - CIVIC DESIGN 

Sec. 1001. - General application. 
The following civic design standards shall apply to all zoning districts. 
Sec. 1002. - Administrative variance. 
The city manager has the authority to modify certain provisions of this article pursuant to section 309. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 9, 10-1-13) 
Sec. 1003. - Sidewalks and street trees. 
In addition to the requirements below, the city may provide developers with adopted typical streetscape designs for designated areas. Such design may include additional materials, details and specifications regarding street trees, street lights, litter containers, benches and similar sidewalk-related items. Conformity with the city bike and pedestrian plan is also required where applicable. In addition, properties with required landscape or sidewalk clear zones which are located on private property shall provide a permanent easement arrangement with the city to ensure public access to said zones. 
(a)  Public sidewalks shall be located along both sides of all streets and shall have minimum widths as specified in the Street Type Dimensions Table. Sidewalks shall consist of two (2) zones: a landscape zone and a sidewalk clear zone. 
(b)  Landscape zone requirements. 
(1)  Said zone shall be located immediately adjacent to the curb and shall be continuous. 
(2)  This zone may be used for street trees, street lights, benches, planters, trash receptacles, bicycle parking racks and other street furniture, pedestrian lights, landscaping, or sod. Additional pavement or other similar elements shall be permitted only as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(c)  Sidewalk clear zone requirements. 
(1)  Said zone shall be located immediately contiguous to the landscape zone and shall be continuous. 
(2)  Said zone shall be hardscape, and shall be unobstructed for a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Special paving within the sidewalk clear zone shall be permitted only as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(3)  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut narrower existing adjacent sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide an adequate transitional clear zone width for the purposes of providing a safe facilitation of pedestrian traffic flow between the adjacent sidewalks, as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(4)  Utilities, including telephone, electric power and cable television in both public and private rights-of-way, shall be placed underground except when extreme conditions of underlying rock or other conditions prevent this requirement from being met and only as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(d)  Street tree planting requirements: 
(1)  Street trees are required and shall be planted in the ground a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center or grouped one hundred and twenty (120) feet on-center within the landscape zone and spaced equal distance between street lights. 
(2)  All newly planted trees shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in caliper measured thirty-six (36) inches above ground, shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of forty (40) feet, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten (10) feet. Said trees shall be in proportion in height to the first floor of building. 
(3)  Trees shall have a minimum planting area of thirty-six (36) square feet and shall have a three-inch raised curb provided along the perimeter of the planting area. All plantings, planting replacement and planting removal shall be approved by the designated city planner, in keeping with the City of Clarkston's tree ordinance replacement values. 
(4)  Tree planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
(5)  The area between required plantings shall either be planted with sod or shall be paved as approved by the planning and zoning board. Paving within the landscape zone shall be limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the total area within the landscape zone. 
(6)  Physical permanent root barriers shall be required along the required street curbs to prevent roots from damaging the curbs. 
(7)  Required tree plantings may be permitted to be planted in the adjacent front yard when extreme conditions prevent the planting of street trees within the landscape zone and only as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(8)  Street tree species shall be consistent for an entire block length. Similar species shall be permitted to change on individual block faces and only when approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(9)  Street lights or pedestrian lights in the landscape zone shall be spaced equidistant between all required street trees. 
(e)  Sidewalks disturbed by development. Any development that disturbs existing city-funded sidewalks including the clear zone and landscape zone shall be replaced by the property owner to its pre-disturbance state and condition. 
(Ord. No. 358, §§ 1, 2, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 396, § 15, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1004. - Street type dimensions. 
(a)  The dimensions of all landscape zones, sidewalks, minimum building facade heights and front yards are governed by street designation and not by use or zoning district to ensure consistency and application of the streetscape requirements. 
(b)  The following table shall apply for all landscape zone, sidewalk, minimum facade building height and front yard dimensions. For all lot area, maximum building height, side yard and rear yard requirements, refer to Article VII, sections 705—713 of this ordinance. 
(c)  Minimum facade building height shall be measured from the sidewalk-level elevation adjacent to the building facade. 

 
Sec. 1005. - Front yard. 
(a)  Front yard general requirements. 
(1)  The square footage contained within the front yard which meets open space criteria established in section 705 may counted towards the open space requirement as required by that zoning district. 
(2)  Automobile parking shall be prohibited from being located within the front yard, except where otherwise permitted in Section 1005(a)(5). 
(3)  Non-residential front yards shall permit and encourage pedestrians to walk on the surface of the front yard excluding fountains, pedestrian furniture, public art and similar elements. 
(4)  Residential front yards. 
a.  When sidewalk level residential units are provided, the front yard shall be landscaped with the exception of terraces, porches, stoops and walkways, which may occupy a maximum of one-half (½) of the front yard area. 
b.  Terraces, porches and stoops shall have a maximum finished floor height of twenty-four (24) inches above finished-grade, unless existing topographical considerations render this requirement unreasonable. 
c.  Shall only permit automobile parking when located on the permitted accessory driveway asphalt or gravel surface. Said accessory driveway shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent coverage of the total lot. 
(5)  Front yards of lots within TC, NC-1, NC-2 and RC districts with a lot area of less than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet shall be permitted to have automobile parking located within the front yard only when the following additional regulations are met: 
a.  Front yard parking shall be limited in area to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 
( Ord. No. 396, § 16, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1006. - Building materials. 
(a)  No exterior wall or facade of any building visible from any public street shall be clad in metal siding, vinyl siding, EIFS, or smooth concrete block. 
(b)  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 396, § 18, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1007. - Relationship of building to street. 
(a)  The primary pedestrian access to all sidewalk level uses and business establishments with public or private street frontage: 
(1)  Shall face and be visible from the public street when located adjacent to such street. When located adjacent to a street that functions as an arterial street or a collector street, said entrance shall face and be visible from such street. 
(2)  Shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk adjacent to such street. 
(3)  Shall remain unlocked during business hours for non-residential uses, including hotels and bed & breakfast inns. 
(b)  A street address number shall be located directly above the primary building entrance, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(c)  Buildings with residential uses at the sidewalk level shall meet the following regulations: 
(1)  All primary pedestrian entrances not adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be linked to the public sidewalk with a pedestrian walkway a minimum of five (5) feet wide. 
(2)  All such buildings with more than four (4) residential units that are adjacent to the sidewalk shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the sidewalk and shall open directly onto the adjacent sidewalk, park, plaza, terrace or porch adjacent to the sidewalk. All pedestrian walkways providing such access shall be perpendicular to the street, unless topography prohibits, and shall be permitted to share said walkway with one (1) adjacent unit. 
(3)  Such buildings shall have windows at sidewalk-level on each street frontage facade which are substantially similar in size to the sidewalk level front facade windows. 
( Ord. No. 396, § 19, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1008. - Storefront street requirements and fenestration. 
(a)  The following table designates certain streets and roads in Clarkston as Storefront Streets. 

 
(b)  All uses that front Storefront Streets, with the exception of religious institutions and fire stations, shall meet the following sidewalk level requirements: 
(1)  The first floor shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  Sidewalk level uses with street frontage on the Storefront Streets shall only be retail or office. Said uses shall be provided for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet from any building facade along the public sidewalk. 
(3)  The length of facade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the length of all street frontages: 
a.  Beginning at a point not more than three (3) feet above the sidewalk, to a height no less than ten (10) feet above the sidewalk; or 
b.  Beginning at the finished floor elevation to a height no less than ten (10) feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is three (3) or more feet above the sidewalk; or 
c.  Beginning at a point not more than sidewalk level, to a height no less than ten (10) feet above the finished floor elevation when the finished floor elevation is below the sidewalk. 
(5)  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. Entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
a.  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the length of the street frontage for residential uses on all streets and for non-residential uses, with the exception of religious institutions and fire stations, on all streets other than streets that function as arterial streets and collector streets. 
b.  Parking decks and structures located along storefront streets shall meet all of the above requirements. See section 1106 for additional requirements for parking decks. 
Sec. 1009. - Site design. 
(a)  Blocks and street infrastructure. 
(1)  Non-residential developments with more than six hundred (600) feet of frontage along a single street shall be divided by streets into blocks having a maximum length of six hundred (600) feet, as measured from street curb to street curb. 
(2)  Streets used to divide properties into blocks shall meet all of the street and sidewalk designations of this zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Opportunities for inter-parcel vehicle access points between all contiguous commercial, office, industrial or multi-family residential tracts shall be provided. 
(4)  Streets with greater than two hundred and fifty (250) total linear feet of un-intersected street frontage shall be prohibited from terminating with a cul-de-sac. 
(5)  Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
(b)  Pedestrian and bicycle pathways. 
(1)  Pathways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and other buildings and facilities. 
(2)  Pathways shall be so located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with automotive traffic. 
(3)  Pathways that are appropriately located, designed and constructed may be combined with other easements and used by emergency and service vehicles, but shall not be used by other automotive traffic. 
(c)  Automobile uses. 
(1)  Drive-through service windows and drive-in facilities shall not be located between a building and the street. 
(2)  Gasoline fuel dispenser structures and associated vehicular services such as air pumps and car washes shall not be located between a building and the street. 
(d)  Screening of dumpsters, loading areas and mechanical systems. 
(1)  All dumpsters shall be enclosed with a wall of equal or greater height on three (3) sides, the material of which shall be similar to the material on the outside of the main building. 
(2)  Dumpsters shall be placed in the rear yard and may be located five (5) feet from the property line if the adjoining property is zoned non-residential and five (5) feet from all applicable buffers if the adjoining property is zoned residential. 
(3)  Loading areas shall not face any public street. 
(4)  Loading dock entrances for non-residential uses shall be screened so that loading docks and related activity are not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Loading and dumping activities located within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of a single-family residential property shall only be permitted to undertake said activities during normal business hours (7:00 a.m.—1:00 p.m.). 
(6)  Accessory mechanical systems and features including air and heating systems shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 1010. - Proportion and scale for multi-family and non-residential uses. 
The following requirements shall apply to all multi-family and non-residential development, including parking decks structures: 
(a)  Building massing: All new development proposals shall incorporate means of reducing the apparent size and bulk of the building. The following methods for reducing the apparent size and mass of larger buildings shall be required. 
(1)  Discontinuous building massing: Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding one hundred (100) continuous linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, and changes in floor level, to add architectural interest and variety, and to relieve the negative visual effect of a simple long wall. 
(2)  Variation in building silhouettes: Variation in the roofline of buildings and offsets in pitched roofs and gables shall be required. Parapets in building masses exceeding one hundred (100) continuous linear feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dental, brick soldier courses, or similar detail. 
(3)  Building step backs: Buildings in excess of fifty (50) feet in height shall be required to step back that portion of the building greater than fifty (50) feet in height a minimum linear distance of ten (10) feet away from the building facade located below the fifty (50) foot height plane as described in section 1004. 
Sec. 1011. - Lighting. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  The purpose of these criteria is to create standards for outdoor lighting which will provide nighttime safety, security and utility, while reducing light pollution and light trespass, and increase conservation of energy. 
(2)  Any lighting used to illuminate parking areas, access drives or loading areas shall be of such a design or level of illumination so as to minimize the amount of ambient lighting perceptible from adjacent properties and that would impair the vision of motorists. 
(3)  The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) Lighting Handbook, Ninth Edition, shall be used as a guide for lighting installations. The definitions in this handbook shall be used for technical terminology. 
(b)  Lighting standards. 
(1)  Entrances into developments from a street may be lighted for traffic safety reasons provided such lighting does not exceed the foot candle requirements for lighting walkways and streets. 
(2)  Lighting poles mounted on private property within fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way may not exceed a height of sixteen (16) feet. 
(3)  Accent lighting for building facades and other vertical structures shall be directed solely onto the building or structure and not toward the sky or onto adjacent properties. Direct light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline or beyond the building's edge. Shielding shall be provided to restrict light to the object being accented. 
(4)  All pole mounted fixtures shall be mounted parallel to the ground. Building mounted floodlights shall be direct cutoff type and set parallel to the ground. 
(5)  All interior lighting shall be designed to prevent the light source or high levels of light from being visible from the street. 
(6)  Lighting for uses adjacent to residentially zoned property shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 1.0 foot-candles along property lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to non-residentially zoned property shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 3.0 foot-candles along property lines. 
(7)  The use of search lights, laser lighting, LED lighting in the forms of channel strips, ropes or similar configurations, or lights that pulse, flash, rotate or simulate motion for advertising or promotions is prohibited. 
(8)  All lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Fixtures. 
i.  Any wall or pole-mounted light fixture shall be a cutoff luminaire whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing and shall not be visible from any street. The light output of the fixture shall be 2.5 percent or less of the total output at ninety (90) degrees from the vertical plane and ten percent or less of total output at eighty (80) degrees from the vertical plane. 
ii.  Light fixtures for canopies covering fueling stations and at individual drive-through facilities shall be mounted such that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface of the canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the canopy. The light output of the fixture shall be 2.5 percent or less of the total output at 90 degrees from the vertical plane and ten (10) percent or less of total output at eighty (80) degrees from the vertical plane. 
b.  Lamps. For parking lot and site lighting, the same type of lamp must be used for the same or similar type of lighting on any one site or development. All exterior luminaires that operate at greater than one hundred (100) watts shall contain lamps having a minimum efficacy of sixty (60) lumens/watt unless the luminaire is controlled by a motion sensor. 
i.  Illumination levels. All site lighting shall be designed so that the level of illumination as measured in foot-candles (fc) at any one point meets the following standards. Minimum and maximum levels are measured at any one point. Average level is not to exceed the specified limit by more than twenty (20) percent, and is derived using only the area of the site included to receive illumination. Points of measure shall not include the area of the building or areas which do not lend themselves to pedestrian traffic. Also, if the major portion of the lighting design is to be in the front of a building, the average level should not be affected by additional lighting in the back of the same building, which would raise the average of the intended area for lighting. Illumination levels are as follows: 

 
  
c.  Methods of measurement Horizontal illumination levels shall be measured at ground level by a light meter certified by its manufacturer as being calibrated in accordance with standards of the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Maximum illumination readings must be taken directly beneath the luminaire. Vertical illumination readings shall be taken on the surface of the object being lighted or at five (5) feet above the ground for pedestrian areas. 
d.  Exemptions. 
(i)  Decorative seasonal lighting for festivals and holidays with a power rating of seventy-five (75) watts or less. 
(ii)  Temporary emergency lighting used by police, firefighters, or other emergency services. 
(iii)  Hazard warning luminaires or safety or security lighting required by regulatory agencies or state or federal law. 
e.  Requirements for submittals. 
(i)  Site lighting plans shall be submitted for planning and zoning commission review and approved for any new lighting installations. Plans shall be at a scale to allow the reviewer to determine conformance with this chapter, such as 1" = 20' or 1" = 40'. 
(ii)  Site lighting plans shall include: 
a.  Location and mounting information for each light. 
b.  Illumination calculations showing light levels in foot candles at points located on a ten-foot or smaller grid, including an illustration of the areas masked out per the requirements above regarding points of measurement. 
c.  A fixture schedule listing fixture design, type of lamp, and wattage of each fixture, and number of lumens after using 85 percent depreciation of initial output for both metal halide and high pressure sodium. 
d.  Manufacturer's photometric data for each type of light fixture. 
e.  An illumination summary, including the minimum, average and maximum foot-candles calculations. 
( Ord. No. 396, § 20, 7-5-16 ) 
ARTICLE XI. - PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1101. - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
(a)  It is the intent of this zoning ordinance that all buildings, structures, and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces are so oriented that they are readily useable for such purposes. 
(b)  Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When an addition is proposed to a building that is nonconforming as to parking or loading requirements, a conforming amount of parking or loading shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. 
(c)  No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
(d)  Off-street parking shall incorporate handicapped spaces into the design of parking facilities. 
Sec. 1102. - Design standards. 
The following design requirements shall apply to all off-street parking spaces, driveways, and loading spaces. 
(a)  Parking Spaces. 
(1)  Off-street surface parking shall not be located between a building and the street without an intervening building, except where otherwise permitted in section 904 (b)(6) and 1005(a)(5). 
(2)  Required dimensions for each parking space. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep. Parking spaces for compact cars shall not be less than eight (8) feet wide and fifteen (15) feet deep. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street parking spaces, access and interior driveways shall be provided with a paved, dust free surface. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect onto or cause glare in any adjacent residential district. 
(4)  Striping and marking. 
a.  All pavement markings intended to delineate off-street parking spaces shall be striped with durable reflective striping designed for that purpose. 
b.  All handicapped spaces shall be striped and marked in accordance with applicable federal and state standards. 
(b)  Compact parking spaces. 
(1)  Developments where thirty (30) or more parking spaces are provided shall have the option to allot up to twenty (20) percent of the parking spaces as compact parking spaces. 
(2)  Compact parking spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and/or by appropriate signage. 
(c)  Bicycle parking. 
(1)  Developments in all TC, NC-1, and NC-2 districts shall provide bicycle parking racks at a ratio of at least one (1) bicycle parking space for every twenty (20) automobile parking spaces. 
(2)  No development shall have fewer than three (3) bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of thirty (30) spaces. 
(3)  Bicycle parking spaces shall be located within the landscape zone a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the building entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space and shall provide a concrete pad upon which the bicycle parking space shall be firmly rooted. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 12-8-10) 
Sec. 1103. - Driveways and curb cuts. 
Driveways and curb cuts shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Interior driveway. Where ninety (90) degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of twenty two (22) feet in width. If forty five (45) or sixty (60) degree angle parking is used, then interior driveways shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic and twenty two (22) feet in width for two-way traffic. Where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width for one-way traffic and twenty (20) feet in width for two-way traffic. 
(b)  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent sidewalk clear zone. A corresponding interior sign or painted bar on the driveway shall be provided adjacent to the sidewalk paving as it intersects the driveway which shall communicate that vehicles must stop or yield for the intervening sidewalk. 
(c)  Driveway curb cut widths shall be a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet for two-way entrances and twelve (12) feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise permitted by the DeKalb or Georgia Department of Transportation. For the purposes of this section, two (2) curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one (1) curb cut provided that each curb cut does not exceed one (1) lane in width. 
(d)  Driveway curb cuts on any street that functions as an arterial street or collector street are permitted only when access cannot be provided from a side or rear street located immediately adjacent to a contiguous property, with the exception of hotel patron drop-off drives. 
(e)  Driveways, except for a driveway to reach the side yard or rear yard or an on-site parking facility, are not permitted between the sidewalk and a building, and shall be perpendicular to any adjacent street. 
(f)  No more than one (1) curb cut shall be permitted for each development, provided that properties with more than one (1) street frontage may have one (1) curb cut located on each street frontage. However, developments on properties with a single street frontage greater than four hundred (400) feet shall be permitted two (2) curb cuts along one street frontage provided that each curb is at least 300 feet apart. 
(g)  A common or joint driveway may be authorized by the planning and development commission. 
(h)  All developments shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five (5) feet connecting ground level parking to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
Sec. 1104. - Parking area landscaping requirements. 
Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be required for all parking lots designed for according to the requirements of section 1213. 
Sec. 1105. - Parking decks and parking structures. 
The following regulations shall apply to parking decks and parking structures: 
(a)  Parking deck facades shall conceal automobiles from visibility from any public right-of-way or private drive or street that are open to the general public, and shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
(b)  All parking decks and parking structures shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five (5) feet connecting ground level parking to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
(c)  All parking decks and parking structures shall have a landscape strip a minimum width of six (6) feet immediately contiguous to the parking facility for the whole of the exterior perimeter of the parking facility containing at least one (1) understory or overstory tree, as appropriate, and ten (10) shrubs per fifty (50) linear feet, and a minimum of ninety (90) percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
Sec. 1106. - Interpretations. 
(a)  Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
(b)  Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this article, and where no similar use is listed, the mayor or his/her designee shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. In making any such determination, the mayor or his/her designee shall follow the principles set forth in the statement of purpose at the beginning of this article. 
Sec. 1107. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use. The square footage is the gross square footage unless otherwise indicated. 
(a)  The total number of permitted parking spaces shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use. 
(b)  All surface parking provided in excess of one hundred (100) percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use shall be of porous paving or grass paving systems and as approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(c)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by use are as follows: 

 
(d)  Additional requirements for non single-family districts. All required off-street parking facilities (other than those for single-family dwellings), including entrances, exits, and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions. Each parking facility: 
(1)  Shall have access to a public street; 
(2)  Shall be graded and paved, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; 
(3)  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar devices; 
(4)  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets and where possible shall be drained towards infiltration swales located in the five-foot head-to-head landscape strips required between vehicles in section 1205(f). 
(5)  To the extent practicable, adjacent parking lots serving nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be interconnected and shall provide for future interconnectivity. 
(6)  Shall have adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night, provided such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties; 
(7)  Shall be designed to conform to the geometric design standards of the institute of traffic engineers; 
(8)  Wheel bumpers shall be placed at the head of all parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk. When wheel bumpers are adjacent to a sidewalk, a two-foot extension of the sidewalk shall be permitted to be substituted in the place of the required wheel bumpers. 
(9)  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless such use is permitted within the district in which the parking area is located. 
(10)  Location on other property. If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby property within the same zoning district, provided a major portion lies within twelve hundred (1,200) feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which such parking is provided. A written agreement among all owners of record shall be provided and held on file with the city clerk. All renewed or terminated leases shall be filed with the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 396, § 17, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1108. - Shared or reduced parking standards. 
Reduced parking for NR-1, NR-2, and NR-3 districts shall be prohibited. For all other districts, the applicant may request a reduction to or waiver of parking standards based on the following criteria: 
(a)  Reduction of parking requirements through a shared parking arrangement may be permissible only through the permission of the mayor and city council provided the arrangement shall avoid conflicting parking demands and provide for safe pedestrian circulation and access. 
(b)  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces shall be provided. 
(c)  A shared parking calculation projection shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times. The process for determining the minimum parking requirements for a mixed-use development or for contiguous properties containing multiple uses is: 
(1)  Determine the minimum number of parking spaces required for each use category from section 1107 of this article. 
(2)  Multiply each parking requirement by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods shown on the table below. 
(3)  Total the number of parking spaces for each of the time periods (that is, add together all of the numbers in each column). 
(4)  The largest column total is the minimum shared parking requirement for the development or collectively for the contiguous properties. 
TABLE: SHARED PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 

 
  
(d)  For contiguous properties sharing parking spaces under this provision, cross-easements shall be filed establishing access to the parking spaces in perpetuity. 
(e)  A reduction in the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required for each of the various uses on a multiple-use property must be clearly shown on the development plan. If shared parking is proposed for a combination of contiguous properties, a plan must be submitted covering all of the properties that will be sharing the parking spaces. 
(f)  A written agreement among all owners of record shall be provided and held on file with the city clerk. All renewed or terminated leases shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(g)  One-half (½) of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
Sec. 1109. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Handicapped Spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act. All handicapped spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. Handicapped parking shall be required on all multi-family and non-residential sites. 
(b)  Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in the closest proximity to major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more than one hundred (100) feet from a major building entrance. 
(c)  Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length and shall have an adjacent access aisle with a minimum width of five (5) feet. Two (2) accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 
(d)  The first one (1) out of every eight (8) accessible parking spaces shall be a van accessible space. Van parking spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and a vertical clearance of at least eight (8) feet along the vehicular route to the parking space. 
(e)  Handicapped parking will be required on all sites. The minimum number to be provided for all multifamily and nonresidential developments is as follows: 

 
Sec. 1110. - Minimum off-street loading requirements. 
When required, one (1) or more off-street loading stalls shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building or structure. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet wide and thirty five (35) feet deep with an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet. A loading space need not be a full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading of a magnitude appropriate to the use served. However, in no case shall such space or its use hinder or obstruct the free movement of vehicles, and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
(a)  The following design requirements shall apply to all off-street loading stalls. 
(1)  Access. All off-street loading stalls shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a public street. 
(2)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street loading stalls and access shall be provided with a paved, dust free surface. If loading stalls are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spill onto adjacent properties. 
(3)  Location. The off-street loading and unloading stalls shall be located to cause a minimum of interference with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk or alley. 
(b)  The following are the minimum number of off-street loading stalls required by type of permitted use. Square footage is the gross amount unless otherwise indicated. 
(1)  Retail operations and all first floor nonresidential uses with a gross floor area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less: One (1) loading space which may be located adjacent to the street curb. 
(2)  Retail operations, and all first floor nonresidential uses, with a gross floor area of greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, and all wholesale and light industrial operations with a gross floor area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet: One (1) loading space. 
(3)  Retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities within hotels and office buildings, with a total usable floor area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more devoted to such purposes: One (1) loading berth for every forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; one (1) loading space for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(4)  Office buildings and hotels with total usable floor area of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more devoted to such purposes: One (1) loading berth for every one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(5)  Industrial and wholesale operations with a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or over shall conform to the following schedule: 

 
(c)  This space may be shared by up to four (4) adjacent users by contractual arrangement specifying details of the sharing, a copy of which is to be provided to the mayor or his/her designee. 
(d)  Applicants may request a reduction to or waiver of loading requirements. The reduction of loading requirements may be permissible only through the permission of the mayor and city council provided the arrangement shall avoid conflicting parking demands and provide for safe pedestrian circulation and access. When loading berths are shared by numerous users, those users shall provide a contractual arrangement specifying details of the shared arrangement to the mayor or his/her designee. 
Sec. 1111. - Automobile rental establishment parking requirements. 
Automobile rental establishments, where permitted, shall park all automobiles for lease in marked spaces that are separate and over and above in number from the required parking spaces for rental business establishments. 
Sec. 1112. - Automobile wash servicees parking requirements. 
Automobile wash services, where permitted as a principal use, shall provide a paved area located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service. Said space shall be adequate in size to accommodate the number of vehicles equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the practical hourly capacity of the washing facilities. The preceding space requirements do not apply to automobile service stations which provide automobile wash services as an accessory use. 
Sec. 1113. - Multi-wheeled vehicle and bus parking. 
Automotive vehicles having more than four (4) wheels, major recreational equipment, school, and other buses are prohibited from parking on residential streets or within public rights-of-way. This section shall not apply to vehicles that park or stand in residential districts for less than eight (8) hours unless engaged in the loading or unloading of the vehicle nor shall it apply to franchised or regulated utility vehicles. See also Ch. 18, Traffic of this Code. 
Sec. 1114. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
In all residential zoning districts the parking or storage of any vehicle larger than a pickup truck, larger than a van, or in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds load capacity as identified or defined by the manufacturer (other than recreational vehicles) is prohibited except when the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Such vehicle may park within a fully enclosed structure that meets all other criteria of the zoning district. 
(b)  Such vehicle may park on the side or to the rear of the primary residential structure on the lot provided that the lot is three (3) acres or larger, but in no case may be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
This section shall not apply to vehicles that park or stand in residential zoning districts for less than eight (8) hours unless engaged in the loading or unloading of the vehicle. 
Sec. 1115. - Parking in residential districts. 
Parking any automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle or trailer shall not be allowed in the front yard, side yard or rear yard of a residence unless said automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle or trailer is parked on a concrete, asphalt or gravel driveway or parking area. It shall be unlawful to park any automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle or trailer on the grass, lawn or dirt areas in the yard of any residence located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Clarkston. 
Sec. 1116. - Parking, storage, or use of major recreational equipment. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automobile vehicles), motorized dwellings tent trailers, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. Such major recreational equipment may be parked or stored in side or rear yards or in a carport or enclosed buildings, provided however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period of not more than twenty four (24) hours during loading or unloading. In the case of a corner lot, no such equipment may be parked or stored in the side yard on the street side of the lot. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
If the lot topography and/or location or size of existing residential structure prevent access to any potential parking area in the side or rear yards of the lot, major recreational equipment may be parked and stored in the required front yard of the lot subject to being located on a concrete, asphalt or gravel driveway or parking area. 
Sec. 1117. - Reduction in front yard setback. 
In the NC-2 district only, fifty (50) percent reduction in the required front yard setback is allowed when all required parking is located exclusively in the rear yard of the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 10, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 396, § 21, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1118. - Reductions in required parking. 
Reduced parking requirements may be aggregated to include reductions based on any of the following factors, with a maximum parking reduction of twenty-five (25) percent for any zoning district. 
(a)  In commercial districts including TC, NC-1, NC-2, and RC, the following reductions in required parking can be applied. 
(1)  When an existing site without vehicular interconnection is retrofitted to provide permanent access to adjacent sites' parking, a ten-percent reduction in the number of required parking spaces shall be allowed. 
(2)  Developments wherein the front door is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a public transit stop shall be allowed a ten-percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces. 
(3)  Mixed use developments that include residential and commercial uses integrated into one structure shall be allowed a ten-percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces. 
(b)  Development within the TC district shall be allowed a ten percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 11, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 396, § 22, 7-5-16 ) 
Sec. 1119. - Pervious parking bonus. 
In the NC-2 district only, for every full size parking space required by section 1107 of this article that is paved with pervious paving as defined in Article IV, an additional fifty (50) square feet of floor area shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 12, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 396, § 23, 7-5-16 ) 
ARTICLE XII. - BUFFER, SCREENING AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure and facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees and landscaping as part of the land development process within Clarkston and to provide minimum landscape, buffer and screening standards for commercial developments in the city so as to enhance architectural features, improve energy efficiency, improve water quality, reduce environmental damage, reduce urban heat island effect, provide quality wildlife habitat, control of soil erosion and aesthetics and to provide a scenic amenity within Clarkston. In addition to the regulations set forth herein, the regulations in The Clarkston Tree Protection Plan shall also apply. All tree protection plans and landscape plans submitted to meet city requirements shall be prepared and stamped by a Georgia licensed landscape architect, provided however that an architect or engineer may also provide such plans if knowledgeable in landscape architectural design and/or tree protection plan preparation. 
Sec. 1202. - Buffer required. 
The mayor and city council recognize that the location of non-residential land uses directly adjacent to single-family, two-family, or multiple-family residential uses can create an incompatible situation. Similarly, the location of two-family or multiple-family land uses directly adjacent to single-family land uses can also create an incompatible situation. 
Sec. 1203. - General buffer requirements. 
A planted or natural buffer strip is required to protect single-family, two-family, and multiple-family residential land uses from negative impacts such as litter, dust, wind, light spill, noise, unsightly views, and other characteristics commonly associated with non-residential land uses and related vehicular and pedestrian traffic which adversely impact the quality of residential life. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual and acoustical privacy for the conduct of residential uses in an undisturbed environment and shall assist in the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. 
Required buffer strips shall be established and maintained by the owner of the non-residential land use. The required buffer strip shall: 
(1)  Be depicted in detail on each site plan or plat prior to final approval. Type and location of natural and planted vegetation shall be included. 
(2)  Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers, or any similar city approved enhancement. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention of the city and formal approval secured prior to initiating activity within the required buffer areas. 
(3)  Utilize existing vegetation where the city has determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or when required, be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
(4)  Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by local law, or for a structure other than a fence. 
(6)  Be planted and maintained in a healthy, growing condition by the property owner. 
(7)  Not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building setback line of the adjoining lot. 
(8)  Preserve the natural topography of the land and shall not be disturbed beyond that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth where too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. However, a slope easement may be cleared and graded where required to prevent soil erosion; provided such easement shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvements. 
Sec. 1204. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 375, § 13, adopted Oct. 1, 2013, repealed former § 1204 in its entirety which pertained to minimum buffer specifications and derived from Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted April 23, 2007. 
Sec. 1205. - Buffers and landscaping. 
(a)  Existing conditions. 
(1)  In those instances where the existing natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening as required by this article, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an opaque acoustical and visual screen having a height of not less than six (6) feet at the time of planting and planted in a minimum of two (2) rows, with staggered on center spacing such that a continuous opaque screen is created within two (2) years of planting. 
(2)  Existing natural vegetation and topography within a buffer shall be preserved and protected with a five-foot setback required along the buffer. 
(b)  Materials and ratios. 
(1)  Plant materials. Buffers shall contain a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of evergreen plant materials comprised of at least three (3) different species for every fifty (50) linear feet and a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of deciduous plant materials. Plant species shall be native, naturalized or other species well-adapted to the local climate and rainfall patterns, disease and pest-free, healthy and vigorous, and obtained from nurseries in USDA hardiness zones 6 or 7. 
(2)  Planting ratios. One (1) tree shall be planted for every fifty (50) square feet of buffer area and five (5) shrubs shall be planted for every fifty (50) square feet of buffer area. 
(c)  The following plants shall be approved for such purpose but shall not be exclusive of other plants which may be suitable, provided that they can form a hardy screen, dense enough and high enough both to interrupt vision and to diffuse the transmission of sound: 
PLANTS AND SHRUBS 

 
(d)  Substitute materials. Other evergreen plant materials having the same growth characteristics as the aforementioned may be substituted, subject to approval by the city prior to installation. 
(e)  Invasive species are prohibited. Bamboo, Eleagnus, Privet, Kudzu, English Ivy, Japanese Honey Suckle and Wisteria shall be prohibited from being planted. 
(f)  Detention ponds. In addition to the screening requirements regulated by this article, the following additional regulations shall apply: 
(1)  The bottom and sides of detention ponds shall be planted with fast-germinating erosion-controlling vegetation, continuous over the entire surface of disturbed soils both inside and outside of the pond. 
(2)  Larger-growing species of perennial plants shall be interplanted in the wet areas of the pond (up to the 25-year storm inundation line) on minimum ten (10) foot centers, that are capable of thriving in intermittently wet and dry soils and will provide food and habitat for birds and other wildlife. 
(3)  Trees are prohibited within or on the outer slopes of detention ponds in order to prevent damage to the pond structure. 
Sec. 1206. - Fences in buffers. 
Fences within required buffer strips shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Fences shall be constructed of solid materials. Use of cyclone fencing which utilizes inserts as screening shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Painted or stained wood shall be maintained. 
(3)  Metal fencing shall be painted or vinyl coated. 
(4)  Fence supports shall face inwards. 
(5)  Posts shall be anchored in concrete. 
(6)  A minimum of four (4) inches shall be clear underwood. 
(7)  Fences may step down a slope, however supports shall be vertical and plumb. 
Sec. 1207. - Walls and fences. 
The setback requirements of this zoning ordinance shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall or fence except those which cause a public or safety hazard. Additionally, retaining walls and fences in a residential zoning district shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(a)  Front yard fences and walls shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height and shall not extend into the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Front yard fences shall be within six (6) inches of the property line and shall not be made of wire, woven metal, or chain link unless located on property of an agricultural or undeveloped use or of a lot size larger than three (3) acres. 
(c)  Ornamental or decorative fences constructed of brick, stone, stucco, split rail, wood or wrought iron and not constructed of exposed block, tires, junk or other discarded material shall be permitted within the front yard setback. 
(d)  Fence foundations and frames shall be on the interior facing of the fence only. 
(e)  No fence or wall shall exceed eight (8) feet in height within a rear or side yard. 
(f)  Retaining walls located adjacent to a sidewalk along a public street shall not exceed a height of two (2) feet and the combined height of a fence where otherwise authorized and retaining wall shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet, unless existing topography prohibits retaining walls of a lesser height. Retaining walls shall be from finished poured concrete or shall be faced with stone, brick or smooth stucco. 
(g)  No "barbed wire" fences shall be erected or maintained in any residential district within in the city. "Barbed wire" fence shall include any wire fence which is outfitted with, or designed to incorporate wire barbs, prongs, or other sharp projections along the wire portion of the fence. 
Sec. 1208. - Fences and hedges, corner visibility. 
On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery, or other obstruction to traffic line of sight vision shall exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of right-of-way lines at two (2) points measured twenty (20) feet along the property line from the intersection. Within said triangle there shall be no sight obscuring wall, fence or foliage higher than thirty (30) inches above grade or in the case of trees, foliage lower than eight (8) feet. Vertical measurement shall be made at the top of the curb on the street or alley adjacent to the nearest side of the triangle or if no curb exists, from the edge of the nearest traveled way. 
Sec. 1209. - Fences and hedges, measurement rule. 
Heights of fences, hedges, and other continuous foliage shall be measured from the adjacent top of the street curb, surface of an alley, or the official established grade thereof, whichever is higher. Along interior lot lines, the measurement shall be from the average grade of the lot line of the parcel on which the fence is located. 
Sec. 1210. - Fences and hedges, exceptions. 
The mayor and city council may approve, or may direct as a condition for granting approval, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these regulations be placed as shielding between different uses, or between like uses upon agreement between the parties affected thereby, provided that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein. 
Sec. 1211. - Tree requirements. 
(a)  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved and/or replaced with suitable vegetation. All existing, healthy hardwood or softwood trees with a caliper of two (2) or more inches at a point three (3) feet above the ground shall be retained whenever feasible; if not feasible, the tree shall be replaced. 
(b)  A minimum of one (1) overstory tree and one (1) understory tree shall be required for each five hundred (500) square feet of the total minimum required open space outside the parking areas. All other existing trees of at least twenty (20) feet in canopy diameter and height shall be counted. Trees required for screening purposes shall not be included in the aforementioned calculation. 
(c)  Except as required by this section and to meet specific community design policies established for various areas of Clarkston, trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources preservation, energy conservation, etc. 
(d)  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated as to prevent damage from environmental changes, particularly grading and other contractor operations, resulting from any building or other improvements as stipulated in the Clarkston Tree Protection Plan. 
(e)  Tree replacement and all tree plantings shall be submitted and approved coincident with the landscaping plan for the site. 
(f)  The following trees shall be permitted: 

 
  

 
Other trees may be approved on a case by case basis. The general criteria for overstory replacement trees are large growing (forty (40) feet tall or greater), and ecologically compatible with the site. The general criteria for understory replacement trees are medium growing (ten (10) to thirty-five (35) in height), and ecologically compatible with the site. All planting and replanting plans are subject to the city tree consultant's approval. 
Sec. 1212. - Landscape strips. 
(a)  Minimum landscape strip dimensions for front yards and street side corner yards along the street frontage for each lot in any zoning district shall be ten (10) linear feet. 
(b)  Permanent structures shall be prohibited within landscape strips (such as buildings, parking spaces, dumpsters, drainage structures and detention facilities). Exceptions include driveways, sidewalks foot paths, necessary retaining walls, signs, and the deposition of storm water runoff or drainage swales through landscape strips perpendicular to the strip. 
(c)  Signs within landscape strips may only be located in areas of turf or ground cover and must not conflict with the growth potential of trees and shrubs. 
(d)  Design standards: All required landscape strips must be designed with at least sixty (60) percent coverage in trees and shrubs, and no more than forty (40) percent coverage in grass and ground cover. Landscape strip coverage will be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Calculate the total spatial area of the landscape strip. 
(2)  Count the number of trees within the landscape strip and multiply by fifty (50) square feet for trees less than six (6) inch caliper and one hundred and fifty (150) square feet for trees greater than six-inch caliper. (This will allow some credit for the spatial coverage of the tree canopy). 
(3)  Measure the spatial coverage of the proposed shrub beds and add to the tree coverage. 
a.  Twelve (12) square feet for each five-gallon shrub; 
b.  Nine (9) square feet for each three-gallon shrub; 
c.  Six (6) square feet for each two-gallon shrub or ground cover; or 
d.  Three (3) square feet for each one-gallon shrub or ground cover. 
e.  This total area shall be greater than or equal to sixty (60) percent of the total area of the strip. 
(4)  The required overstory trees within the front landscaping areas shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper or twelve (12) feet to fourteen (14) feet tall at the time of planting. 
(5)  The required understory trees within the front landscaping areas shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper or eight (8) feet to ten (10) feet tall at the time of planting. 
(6)  Any exposed ground shall be planted with a living ground cover or lawn, with an appropriate mulching material. 
(7)  All trees and landscape materials should be planted at the proper planting times, preferably in the fall, winter or spring and maintained in perpetuity. The city may require performance bonds be posted if planting is delayed due to seasonality. 
(8)  Trees within required landscape strips shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Landscape strips shall have a minimum of one (1) tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of a landscape strip to the nearest whole number. 
b.  Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth. 
(9)  Landscape strips shall be shown on the landscape plan for review and approval as part of the building permit process. 
Sec. 1213. - Parking areas. 
Parking lots designed with fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall be designed as follows: 
(a)  Where parking bays exceed fifteen (15) continuous spaces, a planter island meeting the following criteria is required. The planting islands shall be located no farther apart than every ten (10) parking spaces and at the terminus of all rows of parking. 
(1)  Each separated planter island shall contain a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(2)  Each planter island area shall include at least one (1) shade tree. The remaining area may be planted with shrubs, lawn or living ground cover not to exceed three (3) feet in height with mulch of pine straw, bark, wood chips, turf grass, rocks and the like. 
(3)  All planter islands must be curbed to prevent vehicular encroachment. 
(b)  To promote better growth of trees and shrubs and to encourage flexibility in parking design, the area of not more than four (4) planter islands may be combined into one (1) large island, provided that the large island include one (1) shade tree per two hundred (200) square feet, with a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet exists between shade trees. 
Sec. 1214. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting procedures. The city tree consultant shall inspect all landscaping and no certificate of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements provided in this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Agreement and bonding. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer or owner shall post a performance bond or cash escrow guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of two (2) years after approval or acceptance thereof by the city in a sum established by the city tree consultant. The bond will be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of replacing all of the landscaping required by these specifications. At the end of two (2) years, the building inspector shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer and the bond company of any corrections to be made. 
(c)  Maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all required landscaping in perpetuity, in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Keep landscaping reasonably free of visible signs of insects and disease and appropriately irrigated to enable landscaping to exist in a healthy growing condition; 
(2)  Mow or trim landscaping in a manner and at a frequency appropriate to the use made of the material and species on the site so as not to detract from the appearance of the general area. Growth of plant material at maturity shall be considered where future conflicts such as view, signage, street lighting, utilities and circulation might arise; 
(3)  Maintain all landscaping to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including removal of dead or decaying plant material, and removal of low hanging branches next to sidewalks and walkways obstructing street lighting; 
(4)  Plantings in the buffer area shall be replaced unless the city tree consultant deems such replacement unnecessary; 
(5)  Pruning, trimming, and maintenance shall be performed to maintaining healthy plant matter in accordance with the specifications set forth by the American Forestry Association, the National Arborist Association, or other professional arboricultural organizations; and 
(6)  See Article VI, District Regulations for additional maintenance requirements. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NON-COMMERCIAL POULTRY 

Sec. 1301. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize and provide standards for keeping of poultry in the side or rear yard of residential properties. The intent is to enable residents to keep poultry for non-commercial purposes, while limiting the potentially adverse impacts of such on surrounding neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1302. - Single-family residential districts only. 
The keeping of non-commercial poultry pursuant to this article is limited to the following zoning districts: NR-I, NR-2, and NR-3. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1303. - Number of poultry allowed. 
The maximum number of poultry allowed per lot shall be determined by the total area of the lot whereupon the poultry are kept, in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Less than 0.5 acres: a maximum of three (3) poultry are allowed. 
(b)  0.5 acres to 1.0 acre: a maximum of five (5) poultry are allowed. 
(c)  1.1 acres to 2.0 acres: a maximum of eight (8) poultry are allowed. 
(d)  2.1 acres to 3.0 acres: a maximum of ten (10) poultry are allowed. 
(e)  3.1 acres or greater: a maximum of twelve (12) poultry are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1304. - Roosters prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to keep a rooster within the city. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1305. - Commercial poultry prohibited. 
The keeping of poultry pursuant to this article is permitted for non-commercial, personal use only. The sale within the city of any poultry, eggs, meat or other poultry-related products derived from the keeping of poultry pursuant to this article shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1306. - Enclosure of poultry required; location of poultry. 
(a)  Any individual owning or keeping poultry in the city shall keep said poultry under fence and not allow such poultry to leave the lot upon which they are kept. 
(b)  Poultry shall be kept only in the rear or side yard of the lot. 
(c)  Every coop, pen or other building appurtenant to the keeping of poultry must be located a distance of at least seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest residence. On lots of greater than seventy-five (75) feet of width, such coop, pen or other building appurtenant to the keeping of poultry must be located a distance at least equal to the width of the lot upon which the poultry are kept from the nearest residence. 
(d)  Every coop, pen or other building appurtenant to the keeping of poultry must be located at least five (5) feet from the residential structure on the lot where poultry are kept. 
(e)  Every coop, pen or other building appurtenant to the keeping of poultry must have a minimum floor area of four square feet per poultry kept in such structure. Poultry of less than one month of age shall not be counted for purposes of this subsection, 
(f)  Every coop, pen or other building appurtenant to the keeping of poultry that is permanently affixed to the ground shall meet all requirements for accessory structures set out in Zoning Ordinance section 603, except for the provisions regarding setback and location, which shall be controlled by this section. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
Sec. 1307. - Nuisance prohibited. 
The keeping of poultry shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to unreasonably disturb the use or enjoyment of adjacent properties. Odor generated by poultry shall not be perceptible on adjacent lots. Noise generated by poultry shall not disturb a person of common and reasonable sensitivity to sound at the boundary lines of the lot upon which said poultry are kept. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 8-9-12) 
ARTICLE XIV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1401. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require a greater lot width or depth or size or yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, statute or covenants, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance, statute, or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this ordinance, the provisions of such other ordinance, statutes or covenants shall govern. 
Sec. 1402. - Severability clause. 
Should any section or provision of this zoning ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the zoning ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. The mayor and city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the zoning ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 1403. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All resolutions and ordinances and parts of resolutions and ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of sight development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions, provided however, modification or repeal of such past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this ordinance. 
All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the mayor and city council shall remain in full force and effect and all terms, conditions, and obligations imposed by the mayor and city council with respect thereto shall remain in effect and be binding. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against such violations and for the prosecution of any violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commended. 
Sec. 1404. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption [April 23, 2007], the public welfare demanding it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1968 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1968 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1968 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1968 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1968 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 