CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CHATTAHOOCHEE HILLS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 1, 2017  Effective: August 1, 2017 
____________ 

> 
CHATTAHOOCHEE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Tom Reed 
Mayor 
____________ 
James "Ricky" Stephens, District 1 
Richard Schmidt, District 2 
Claire Williams, District 3 
Faye Godwin, District 4 
Don Hayes, District 5 
City Council 
____________ 
Dana Wicher 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Dana Wicher, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to, organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 2017. 

 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CHATTAHOOCHEE HILLS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
WHEREAS, the ordinances of the City are not codified but are only maintained at City Hall and are not easily accessible and searchable by the public; 
WHEREAS, it is the intention of the City Council to codify the ordinances of the City for such use by the public; 
WHEREAS, the City engaged Municipal Code Corporation to codify the ordinances and to place those on the internet for ease of use; and 
WHEREAS, Municipal Code Corporation has now presented the City with the codification of the ordinances. 
NOW THEREFORE, the Mayor and Council of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia ordain that: 
Section 1: The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 35, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2: All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 2, 2016, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3: The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by incarceration not to exceed six (6) months or a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5: Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6: Ordinances adopted after August 2, 2016, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7: This ordinance shall become effective August 1, 2017. 
  
SO ORDAINED AND EFFECTIVE this 1 st day of August, 2017. 
  
Approved: 
  

Attest: 
  


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER 
Senate Bill\553 
By: Senators Reed of the 35th and Adelman of the 42nd 
AS PASSED 
AN ACT 
To incorporate the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country in Fulton County; to provide for a charter for the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for general powers and limitations on powers; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, and districts relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city manager, a city attorney, a city clerk, a tax collector, a city accountant, and other personnel; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for ethics and disclosures; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for homestead exemptions; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for referenda; to provide effective dates and transitional provisions governing the transfer of various functions and responsibilities from Fulton County to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country; to provide for severability; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the Charter of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. The City of Chattahoochee Hill Country in the County of Fulton, and the inhabitants thereof, are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the "City of Chattahoochee Hill Country" and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall be as set forth and described in Appendix A of this Act, and said Appendix A is incorporated into and made a part of this Act. The city manager shall maintain a current map and written legal description of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map and description shall incorporate any changes which may hereafter be made in such corporate boundaries. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Act. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Act or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Act and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades to the extent permitted by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council, utilizing procedures enumerated in title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of storm water and establishment of a storm-water utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Ethics. To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials, and employees, establishing procedures for ethics complaints and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and, from time to time, to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Act or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Act and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers; and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes, ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes, other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Act as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and any listing of particular powers in this Act shall not be held to be exclusive of others or restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Act. If this Act makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of Chattahoochee Hill Country, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. 
(b)  The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city. 
(c)  Each councilmember shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of his or her respective council district voting at the elections of the city. For the purpose of electing the five councilmembers, there shall be five council districts, designated Council Districts 1 through 5, as described in Appendix B of this Act and the accompanying Redistricting Plan Components Report, which are attached to and made a part of the Act of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. Each person desiring to offer as a candidate for councilmember shall designate the council district for which he or she is offering. 
Sec. 2.02. - Mayor and city councilmembers; election, terms, and qualifications for office. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, the mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the area comprising the corporate limits of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election for mayor or councilmember, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district unless that person has been a resident of the district such person seeks to represent for a continuous period of at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election for councilmember and continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  The first general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2007. Thereafter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in the odd-numbered year following by more than two years the year in which said first municipal election is held, and biennially thereafter. 
(c)  The first mayor and the initial council members shall take office on the first day of the first month immediately following the first municipal election provided for subsection (b) of this section and shall serve for terms which expire when their successors take office in January of the first year immediately following the second municipal election provided for therein. The mayor and council members representing Post 2 and Post 4 who shall take office as provided in code section 21-2-541.1 of O.C.G.A. following the second municipal election shall serve for [a] term of two years expiring when their successors take office. Thereafter, the mayor and council members for Post 2 and Post 4 shall take office as provided in code section 21-2-541.1 of O.C.G.A., and shall serve for terms of four years. Council members for Post 1, Post 3, and Post 5 shall serve for terms of four years and shall take office as provided in code section 21-2-541.1 of O.C.G.A. The initial members and future members of the governing authority shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-74, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Act or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
Sec. 2.04. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 2.05. - Election by majority vote. 
The candidates for mayor and councilmember who receive a majority of the votes cast in the applicable election shall be elected to a term of office. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such runoff shall be held at the time specified by state election law, unless such run-off date is postponed by court order. 
Sec. 2.06. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2.07. - Compensation and expenses. 
The annual salary of the mayor shall be $1,200.00 and the annual salary for each councilmember shall be $1,200.00. Such salary shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The city council may provide by ordinance for the provision of insurance, retirement, workers' compensation, and other employee benefits to the mayor and members of the city council and may provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and members of the city council in carrying out their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 11-09-1993, § 1, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 12-06-104, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Meetings and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall meet on the first working day in January immediately following each regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor and councilmembers by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [councilmember or mayor as the case may be] of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the Act, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I, by the laws of the State of Georgia, am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of my district and the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal Act. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(b)  Following the induction of the mayor and councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the councilmembers, shall elect a councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence, except that the mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote as a councilmember and may not exercise the mayor's prerogative to vote in the case of a tie. During the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore may veto any action of the city council. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(c)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(d)  Special meetings of the council may be held on the call of the mayor or three members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all members of the council and the mayor personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor or a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any member there shall be a roll-call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the council to be adopted, the measure must receive at least two affirmative votes and must receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the council for official action except when such member of council has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie or in the case where his or her vote will provide the affirmative vote required for approval of a matter. 
Sec. 2.11. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Act, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country as provided by article I of this Act. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
Sec. 2.12. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city; provided, however, that the office of city manager may be abolished only upon an affirmative vote of four of the five members of the council. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Act or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2.13. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be nominated by the mayor and be confirmed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Act or by applicable state law. 
(b)  No member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall hold any elective office in the city. Councilmembers and the mayor, however, may serve as voting ex officio members of such boards, commissions, or authorities. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Act or any applicable state law. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the designated officer of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of the members of the council. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Act or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Act, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the designated officer of the city. 
Sec. 2.14. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend the same. Except as set forth herein, a resolution or ordinance may be considered, passed, approved, disapproved, or amended at the time it is offered, provided that the resolution or ordinance was made available for public review at least 24 hours prior to meeting at which the resolution or ordinance shall be considered. Every proposed ordinance that amends the zoning ordinances and every proposed ordinance that grants a variance to any ordinance shall have been read at two city council meetings, provided that the beginnings of said meetings shall be not less than 24 hours nor more than 60 days apart. Nothing shall prevent the city council from adopting an amended resolution or ordinance at the same meeting in which the resolution or ordinance was amended provided the original text of the resolution or ordinance had been made available for public review as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-06-51, § 2, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 2.15. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor. 
(a)  Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the council shall be presented promptly to the mayor. Except for council approval of appointments to committees, boards, and commissions, the employment of any appointed officer, internal affairs, or matters which must be approved by the voters, the mayor may veto any action adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The veto must be exercised no later than the next regular city council meeting following the meeting at which the action was taken. If an action is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council a written statement of the reasons for the mayor's veto. 
(c)  An action vetoed by the mayor shall automatically be on the agenda at the next regular meeting of the city council for reconsideration. If the minimum number of councilmembers necessary to vote on overriding the veto are not present, the action may be continued until the next meeting at which the minimum number of councilmembers are present. Such action shall not become effective unless it is readopted by the affirmative votes of at least four members of council within 60 days of the veto. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance or resolution. The approved part or parts of any ordinance or resolution making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved or reduced shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this Act. 
(e)  If an ordinance or resolution has been signed by the mayor, it shall become effective. If an ordinance or resolution is neither approved nor disapproved by the next regular meeting of the city council, it shall become effective. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.01. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city government, a member of and the presiding officer of the city council, and responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. The mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises in the city. The mayor may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as specified in this Act or as may be provided by ordinance consistent with this Act. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the advocate of policy; 
(3)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Vote on any motion, resolution, ordinance, or other question before the council only as provided in section 2.10 of this Act and vote on any matter before a committee on which he or she serves; 
(6)  Obtain short-term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the city council to do so; 
(7)  Appoint councilmembers to oversee and report on the functions of the various departments of the city; 
(8)  Require the city manager to meet with him or her at a time and place designated for consultation and advice upon the affairs of the city; 
(9)  Name qualified residents of the city to boards and commissions with approval of the city council; 
(10)  Make recommendations with respect to the employment or termination of city employees; 
(11)  Prepare or have prepared an agenda for each meeting of the city council which shall include all business submitted by the mayor, any councilmember, the city manager, and the city attorney; and 
(12)  Fulfill and perform such other duties as are imposed by this Act and duly adopted ordinances. 
Sec. 3.02. - City manager; appointment, qualification, and compensation. 
The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the council, for an indefinite term an officer whose title shall be "city manager" and the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her educational background and actual experience in, and knowledge of, the duties of office as hereinafter prescribed. 
Sec. 3.03. - City manager; chief administrative officer. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. The city manager must devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which said officer has jurisdiction; provided, however, that the council may, by resolution, permit the office of city manager to be a part-time position. 
Sec. 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
The city manager shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that excepted from the power of this appointment are those officers and employees who by this Act are appointed or elected by the council or departments not under the jurisdiction of the city manager; 
(3)  Remove employees employed by said officer without the consent of the council and without assigning any reason therefor; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this Act or that may hereafter be created by the council except as otherwise provided in this Act; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the council with a right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(6)  Recommend to the council, after prior review and comment by the mayor, for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(8)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within said officer's jurisdiction to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the council; 
(9)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(10)  Keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(11)  Make a full written report to the council on the first of each month, unless otherwise directed by the council, showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month, and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the clerk of the city; 
(12)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; and 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Act or required by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
Sec. 3.05. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.08 of this Act, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 3.06. - City manager; removal. 
(a)  The mayor and council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  The council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal and, unless he or she has been convicted of a felony at that time, he or she shall be given not less than 60 days' severance pay. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(c)  If the city manager becomes disabled and is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 3.07. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may designate in writing any administrative employee of the city who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager during the city manager's temporary absence from the city or during the city manager's disability. If such designation has not been made and the city manager is absent from the city or unable to perform the duties of the office or to make such designation, the council may, by resolution, appoint any qualified administrative employee of the city to perform the powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until the city manager shall return to the city, the disability ceases, or the council appoints a new city manager. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the council may designate a person as acting city manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. 
Sec. 3.08. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall nominate and the council shall confirm by majority vote of the council a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city attorney shall review all contracts of the city but shall not have the power to bind the city. 
Sec. 3.09. - City clerk. 
The mayor may appoint a city clerk, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the council, to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and to perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the mayor or city manager may direct. 
Sec. 3.10. - Tax collector. 
The mayor may appoint a tax collector, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the council, to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Act and the ordinances of the city; and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.11. - City accountant. 
The mayor may appoint a city accountant, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the council, to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.12. - Consolidation of functions. 
As elsewhere herein, the city manager, with the approval of the council, may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may also, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of the appointment of other persons to perform the same. 
Sec. 3.13. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and a pay plan which shall be submitted to the council for approval. Said plan may apply to all employees of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country and any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted by the council, neither the council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except in conformity with such pay plan or pursuant to an amendment of said pay plan duly adopted by the council. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tempore shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Sec. 4.02. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. The judge shall be appointed by resolution of the council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the council. The position of judge created in this article shall not be a full-time position, and the person serving in said position may engage in the private practice of law. 
(b)  The judge pro tempore shall serve as requested by the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by resolution of the council, and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, the judge and judge pro tempore shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
(d)  The judge, or judge pro tempore, shall serve for a term of four years but may be removed from the position by a two-thirds' vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
Sec. 4.03. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or imprisonment for 15 days. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the full extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Act or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
Sec. 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Fulton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 5.02. - Preparation of budgets. 
The council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 5.03. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall, after review and comment by the mayor, submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 5.04. - Action by council on budget. 
The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditures required by law, or by other provisions of this Act, and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
Sec. 5.05. - Audits. 
(a)  There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Act. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(b)  As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of chapter 81 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A., relating to local government audits and budgets. 
Sec. 5.06. - General homestead exemption. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, except for any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in code section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Chattahoochee Hill Country ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $15,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in code section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 5.07. - General homestead exemption for citizens age 65 or over. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country except for any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Chattahoochee Hill Country ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $15,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 5.08. - Homestead exemption for citizens age 65 or over meeting certain income requirements. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in code section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(3)  "Income" means adjusted gross income as such term is defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as such code is defined in code section 48-1-2 of the O.C.G.A., except that for purposes of this section the term shall include only that portion of income or benefits received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system which exceeds the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. 
(4)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Chattahoochee Hills who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Chattahoochee Hills ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes in the amount of $20,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. The exemption granted by this subsection shall only be granted if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, does not exceed the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act for the immediately preceding year. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age, income, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, or the designee therefore, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in code section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of the Chattahoochee Hills, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-73, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 5.09. - Homestead exemption for citizens age 70 or over and disabled persons meeting certain income requirements. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, including, but not limited to, any ad valorem taxes to pay interest on and to retire municipal bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in code section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. 
(3)  "Income" means adjusted gross income determined pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for federal income tax purposes, except that for the purposes of this section the term shall include only that portion of income or benefits received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system which exceeds the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. 
(4)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 70 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under subsection (b) of this section is made. 
(b)  Each resident of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country who is a senior citizen or who is disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Chattahoochee Hill Country ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes for the full value of that homestead. The exemption granted by this subsection shall only be granted if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead does not exceed the maximum amount which may be received by an individual and an individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act for the immediately preceding year. 
(c)  (1)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (b) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under chapter 34 of title 43 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. Such certificate or certificates shall constitute part of and be submitted with the application provided for in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(2)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, giving the person's age, income, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, to make a determination regarding the initial and continuing eligibility of such owner for such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, shall provide application forms for this purpose. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in code section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A., as amended. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year so long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, or the designee thereof, in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or county or independent school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2007. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - Referendum and initial election. 
(a)  Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Fulton County shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the qualified voters of the proposed City of Chattahoochee Hill Country for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for the third Tuesday in June, 2007. The superintendent shall issue the call for such election at least 30 days prior to the date thereof. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Fulton County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
Shall the Act incorporating the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country in Fulton County and granting homestead exemption described therein be approved? 
( ) YES 
( ) NO 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect as provided in section 6.02 of this Act; otherwise, it shall not take effect and shall be void and of no force and effect. The initial expense of such election shall be borne by Fulton County. Within two years after the election if the incorporation is approved, the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall reimburse Fulton County for the actual cost of printing and personnel services for such election and for the initial election of the mayor and members of the city council pursuant to subsection (b) of section 2.02 of this Act. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his or her further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
(b)  For the purposes of the referendum election provided for in this section and for the purposes of the election to be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2007, the qualified electors of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall be those qualified electors of Fulton County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country as described by Appendix A of this Act. At subsequent municipal elections, the qualified electors of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall be determined pursuant to the authority of chapter 2 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  Only for the purposes of holding and conducting the referendum election provided for by this section and holding and conducting the election of the mayor and city councilmembers of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country to be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2007, the election superintendent of Fulton County is vested with the powers and duties of the election superintendent of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country and the powers and duties of the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. 
Sec. 6.02. - Effective dates. 
(a)  Section 6.01 of this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. The remaining provisions of this Act shall become effective on October 30, 2006; provided, however, that the provisions of this Act necessary for the election to be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2007, shall be effective upon the certification of the results of such referendum election. 
(b)  A period of time will be needed for an orderly transition of various government functions from Fulton County to the City of Chattahoochee Hills. Accordingly, there shall be a transition period beginning December 1, 2007, and ending at midnight on November 30, 2009. During such transition period, all provisions of this Act shall be effective as law, but not all provisions of this Act shall be implemented. 
(c)  During such transition period, Fulton County shall continue to provide within the territorial limits of Chattahoochee Hill Country all government services and functions which Fulton County provided in that area as of the date of enactment of this Act, except to the extent otherwise provided in this section; provided, however, that by agreement of Fulton County and the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country responsibility for any such service or function may be transferred to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country at such time as may be agreed upon by the parties. If this Act is approved as provided for by section 6.01 of this Act, effective December 1, 2007, the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall collect taxes, fees, assessments, fines and forfeitures, and other moneys within the territorial limits of Chattahoochee Hill Country; provided, however, that upon at least 30 days' prior written notice to Fulton County by the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, the authority to collect any tax, fee, assessment, fine, forfeiture, or other moneys shall remain with Fulton County after December 1, 2007, until such time as Fulton County receives subsequent notice from the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country that such authority shall be transferred to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. Where a particular tax, fee, assessment, fine, forfeiture, or other amount collected is specifically related to the provision of a particular government service or function by Fulton County, the service or function shall continue to be provided by the county contingent upon payment by the city of the actual cost of providing such service or function unless otherwise provided in a written agreement between the city and the county. Any existing contract for the performance of a governmental service with a private person residing or doing business within the city limits shall not be altered or adversely affected by the establishment of this Act of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country. 
(d)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country: 
(1)  Shall hold regular meetings and may hold special meetings as provided in this Act; 
(2)  May enact ordinances and resolutions as provided in this Act; 
(3)  May amend this Act by home rule action as provided by general law; 
(4)  May accept gifts and grants; 
(5)  May borrow money and incur indebtedness to the extent authorized by this Act and general law; 
(6)  May levy and collect an ad valorem tax for the calendar year next following the first municipal election; 
(7)  May establish a fiscal year and budget; 
(8)  May create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city; appoint and remove officers and employees; and exercise all necessary or appropriate personnel and management functions; and 
(9)  May generally exercise any power granted by this Act or general law, except to the extent that a power is specifically and integrally related to the provision of a governmental service, function, or responsibility not yet provided or carried out by the city. 
(e)  During the transition period, the Municipal Court of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall exercise its jurisdiction to the extent appropriate with respect to the government services and functions performed by the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country and the appropriate court or courts of Fulton County shall retain jurisdiction over the area incorporated as the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country with respect to government services and functions performed by Fulton County. Any transfer of jurisdiction to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country at the beginning of, during, at the end of, or after the transition period shall not in and of itself abate any judicial proceeding pending in Fulton County or the pending prosecution of any violation of any ordinance of Fulton County. 
(f)  During the transition period, the governing authority of Chattahoochee Hill Country may at any time, without the necessity of any agreement by Fulton County, commence to exercise its planning and zoning powers; provided, however, that the city shall give the county at least 30 days' written notice of the date on which the city will assume the exercise of such powers. Upon the governing authority of Chattahoochee Hill Country commencing to exercise its planning and zoning powers, the Municipal Court of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall immediately have jurisdiction to enforce the planning and zoning ordinances of the city. The provisions of this subsection shall control over any conflicting provisions of any other subsection of this section. 
(g)  Effective upon the termination of the transition period, subsections (c) through (f) of this section shall cease to apply except for the last sentence of subsection (e) which shall remain effective. Effective upon the termination of the transition period, the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall be a fully functioning municipal corporation and subject to all general laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 08-09-41, § 2, 9-23-2008) 
Sec. 6.03. - Catchlines. 
The catchlines of sections of this Act or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and: 
(1)  Shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  Shall not be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. 
Furthermore, the article and section headings contained in this Act shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any article or section hereof. 
Sec. 6.04. - Directory nature of dates. 
If it is necessary to delay any action called for in this Act for providential cause, delay in securing approval under the federal Voting Rights Act, or any other reason, it is the intention of the General Assembly that the action be delayed rather than abandoned. Any delay in performing any action under this Act, whether for cause or otherwise, shall not operate to frustrate the overall intent of this Act. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is specifically provided that: 
(1)  If it is not possible to hold the referendum election provided for in section 6.01 of this Act on the date specified in that section, then such referendum shall be held as soon after such date as is reasonably practicable; and 
(2)  If it is not possible to hold the first regular municipal election provided for in section 2.02 of this Act on the date specified in that section, then there shall be a special election for the initial members of the governing authority to be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, and the commencement of the initial terms of office shall be delayed accordingly. 
Sec. 6.05. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 6.06. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
APPENDIX A 
The corporate limits of the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country shall consist of the following described territory of Fulton County: 
Fulton County 
Tract: 103.01 
BG: 7 
7997 
Tract: 104 
BG: 1 
All that portion of block 1008 located westerly of Pea Creek/Little Pea Creek to its intersection of Hemp Road and Rivertown Road 
1010 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 
1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 
1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 
1046 1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 
1058 1059 1060 1061 1062 1063 1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 
1070 1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 1076 1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 
1082 1083 1084 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 
BG: 2 
2003 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 
2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 
2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2050 2994 2995 
BG: 4 
4002 4003 4004 4005 4039 4040 4041 
The corporate limits shall not include any such territory which, on the date of the approval of this Act, was a part of any other municipal corporation. 
APPENDIX B. - COUNCIL DISTRICTS[1] 
Council Districts 1 through 5 shall consist of the described territory of the City of Chattahoochee Hills as found below. All references to Blocks are to the 2010 Decennial Census provided in the report of the United States Census Bureau for the State of Georgia, County of Fulton. 
Any part of the City of Chattahoochee Hills which is not included in any such district described herein shall be included within the district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the 2010 Decennial Census. Nevertheless, any part of the City of Chattahoochee Hills which is described herein as being in a particular district shall not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall be included with that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the 2010 Decennial Census. 
Any Block that is not located in the City of Chattahoochee Hills shall not be included in any district notwithstanding that such Block is identified herein and placed in a district. Any portion of a Block that is not located in the City of Chattahoochee Hills shall not be included in any district notwithstanding that such Block is identified herein and placed in a district. The portion of such a Block that is located in the City of Chattahoochee Hills shall remain in the district set forth herein. 
With the exception of Tract/Block 170303-1001 located in Coweta County (County Number 077), all of the Tract/Blocks are located in Fulton County (County Number 121). 

 
( Ord. No. 17-03-165 , § 2, 3-7-2017) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-03-165 , §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2017, repealed the former § 6.06, App. B, and enacted a new § 6.06, App. B as set out herein. The former § 6.06, App. B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11-06-85, § 2, adopted June 7, 2011. 

APPENDIX C. - CERTIFICATE AS TO MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR INCORPORATION OF A NEW MUNICIPAL CORPORATION 
I, ___________, Georgia State _______ from the _____ District and the author of this bill introduced at the 2006 Session of the General Assembly of Georgia, which grants an original municipal Act to the City of Chattahoochee Hill Country, do hereby certify that this bill is in compliance with the minimum standards required by Chapter 31 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. This certificate is executed to conform to the requirements of Code Section 36-31-5 of the O.C.G.A. 
So certified, this _____ day of _______, 20_____. 
___________ 
___________ 
Plan Name: chathillccp1re Plan Type: Local User: staff Administrator: S035 
Redistricting Plan Components Report 
District 001 
Fulton County 
Tract: 104 
BG: 1 
1070 1071 
BG: 4 
4004 4005 4039 4040 4041 
District 002 
Fulton County 
Tract: 104 
BG: 1 
All that portion of block 1008 located westerly of Pea Creek/Little Creek to its intersection of Hemp Road and Rivertown Road 
1010 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1022 1059 1060 1061 1062 
1063 1064 1065 1066 1998 
BG: 4 
4002 4003 
District 003 
Fulton County 
Tract: 103.01 
BG: 7 
7997 
Tract: 104 
BG: 1 
1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 
1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 
1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 1054 1055 
1056 1057 1058 1993 1994 1995 1996 1067 1068 1069 1072 1073 
1074 1075 1076 1077 
District 004 
Fulton County 
Tract: 104 
BG: 2 
2003 2018 2019 2020 2021 2046 2047 2048 2050 
District 005 
Fulton County 
Tract: 104 
BG: 1 
1052 1053 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 1084 1997 
BG: 2 
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 
2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 
2994 2995 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - City ordinance defined. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. As consistent with the Charter, definitions shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. 
Charter. The term "Charter" refers to the enabling legislation creating a municipal charter for the city enacted as SB 553 during the General Session of the 2007 General Assembly. 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 
Council. The term "council" means the five councilmembers and the mayor. 
Councilmember. The term "councilmember" refers to the individual members of the city council. 
County. The term "county" means Fulton County, Georgia. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" refers to the county fire department or the city fire department, whichever provides services to the city. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Officials. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Chattahoochee Hills" were added thereto. 
Owner. The term "owner" applies to a building or land and shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, and bodies political and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Police. The term "police" refers to the police department or police chief of the county or of the city, whichever is serving as the police force for the city. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto and area owned or dedicated as public right of way, within the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer or official. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Chattahoochee Hills" were added. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-3. - Non-exclusivity. 
Terms not defined by section 1-2 may be defined elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty. 
(a)  Unless specified elsewhere in the Code, any violation of this Code shall be punishable up to a maximum penalty allowed by state law or the City Charter. 
(b)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(c)  Community service may be substituted for the fine with the rate of hourly work set to that of the federal minimum wage. 
(d)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this section conflicts with the laws of the state, then state law applies to that particular punishment. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-5. - Exercise of powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised, as provided by the charter, by the city, and by the parties with whom the city contracts for municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section of The Code of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes for local improvements; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-01, art. 4, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Meeting times. 
(a)  As described in section 2.09 of the Charter, the council shall meet at least once a month. Regular meetings shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. The council may designate alternative meeting times and days so long as the time is published either electronically on the city website or through other means, including posting at the building designated as city hall at least 24 hours before the meeting. 
(b)  If the regular meeting falls on a federal holiday, the council may reschedule the meeting and publish the change as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called in accordance with the Charter section 2.09. 
(d)  Any meeting of the council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-09-95, art. 1, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 2-2. - Compliance with state law. 
(a)  All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Georgia Open and Public Meetings Act codified at O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(b)  All city records subject to the Georgia Open Records Act, codified at O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., shall be available to the public. The city clerk shall comply with any valid requests under the Georgia Open Records Act and prepare any materials requested. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 2, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 2, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-3. - Document retention. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the city adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the Georgia secretary of state as amended from time to time by future resolutions of the mayor and council of the city. The city clerk shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. All requests made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., excepting standardized routine requests of the city police department, fire department, and municipal court shall be made to the court clerk. No record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule; provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning, or other reliable photographic or digital means as permitted by law. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 3, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 3, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-4. - Fees. 
The city clerk shall charge the full amount permitted by state law to copy the records subject to the Georgia Open Records Act. If compilation and replication of such documents takes more than 15 minutes, the city clerk may charge an additional reasonable administrative charge. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 4, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 4, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-5. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  The council, when sitting as a judicial or quasi-judicial body pursuant to public law, its charter, or its ordinances, shall compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena under the same rules as prevail in the superior courts, and any witness who shall fail to respond to the subpoena, or who shall refuse to testify under oath, shall be guilty of contempt. 
(b)  The subpoenas as authorized in the preceding section shall bear witness in the name of the mayor; shall be issued by the city clerk; and shall be served by the chief of police, any police officer, or by such other person as the mayor may designate. 
(c)  Should any person fail to respond to a subpoena of the council, after having been lawfully served, without good cause, or should the person refuse to testify under oath, then the council shall hold the person in contempt, and, in their discretion, punish the person by the imposition of a fine according to the maximum allowed by state law. Each of the failures or refusals herein described shall constitute a separate contempt. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 5, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 5, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-6. - Reimbursement and travel. 
The city manager shall establish a system for reimbursement of business-related expenses and travel for all municipal employees. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 1, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 1, § 6, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 1, § 6, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-31. - Personnel manual. 
The city manager shall establish by ordinance a personnel manual for all municipal employees. In addition to sections deemed necessary by the city manager, the manual shall include policies regarding equal employment opportunity, nondiscrimination, and sexual harassment. The manual will be updated from time to time as required by federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 2, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 2, § 1, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-32. - Job descriptions. 
The city shall maintain a job specification for each position held by a municipal employee. The city may provide a job specification for contracted positions. Such specification shall describe the duties of the position, the qualifications necessary, licenses required, to whom such employee reports, expected salary range, and such other information as is necessary to recruit for such position effectively. Such specifications may be amended from time to time by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 2, § 3, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 2, § 2, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-33. - Benefits. 
It shall be the policy of the city to attract and retain a qualified workforce through the provision of a comprehensive package of benefits. To that end, the city shall be authorized to contract with benefits providers for the purpose of providing insurance, retirement, pension plans and other benefits deemed necessary by the council upon approval of the benefit program by the city council. Eligibility for benefits shall be specified in the personnel manual and the annual cost to employees included in the annual operating budget. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 2, § 4, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 2, § 3, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-34. - Records. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 2, § 5, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 2, § 4, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-35—2-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-57. - Authorization. 
The following departments may be established by the council: 
(1)  Executive administration. 
(2)  General administration. 
(3)  Community development. 
(4)  Engineering. 
(5)  Public works. 
(6)  Police. 
(7)  Fire. 
(8)  Parks and recreation. 
(9)  Municipal court. 
(10)  Information technology. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 3, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 3, § 1, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-58. - Right of contract. 
The city may contract with third parties to provide all or portions of the functions of any municipal department. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 3, § 2, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 3, § 2, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-59. - Oversight. 
There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the policy, administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the director's department or agency. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 3, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 3, § 3, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 3, § 3, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-60—2-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-77. - Planning commission, parks and recreation commission; authority to create additional boards and commissions. 
The city shall have a planning commission and a parks and recreation commission. The city may have additional boards and commissions as may be created by the city council. All boards and commissions shall have the powers and duties and be subject to and governed by the regulations set forth in this article and this Code. The duties of each commission are defined in the corresponding Code section. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 4, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, §§ 1, 2, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 1, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 1, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 1, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-78. - Planning commission. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of either five or seven members who shall serve one-year terms, which shall begin on April 1 and end on March 31 of the following year. Members may serve successive terms. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or otherwise in this Code, the council shall establish qualifications for members of the planning commission. Each member shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Each member must be a resident of the city. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of regularly scheduled meetings within their yearly term. Failure to do so warrants removal from the commission by the city council. This requirement does not include attendance at special called meetings or sub-committee meetings. 
(d)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. If no replacement has been appointed at the end of a member's term, they may continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, except in such cases when a replacement has not been named due to a decrease in the number of members. 
(e)  Any member may be removed for cause by a vote of at least three members of the council. 
(f)  The planning commission may receive reimbursement for customary expenses previously approved and incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the planning commission. 
(g)  The planning commission shall meet in accordance with an established schedule of meetings approved by the city council. The chair of the planning commission shall have the authority to cancel any meeting for which no action items or public hearings are scheduled on the agenda provided that notice of such cancellation must be given to the city clerk in sufficient time for the city clerk to provide public notice of such cancellation as required under state law. 
(h)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to review and make recommendations for action by the mayor and city council on the following: 
(1)  All applications for annexation, rezoning, master plans, variances, and concurrent ordinances; 
(2)  Applications for use permits and modifications to same; 
(3)  Amendments to the text of the city zoning ordinance, city subdivision regulations, the city comprehensive plan, the future land use map, and the zoning map; 
(4)  Perform other functions of the planning commission as may be required by federal and state law; 
(5)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the mayor and city council from hereafter assigning other duties to the planning commission. 
(i)  Any application that is to be considered by the planning commission must be submitted to the department of community development in accordance with the established filing schedule as prepared by said department. 
(j)  At the close of each public hearing, the chair of the planning commission shall call the members to order for consideration and a vote on the issue currently before them. The vote of the planning commission shall be nonbinding and shall be made in the form of a recommendation to the mayor and city council from the following list: 
(1)  Approval as recommended by staff with recommended conditions; 
(2)  Approval as recommended by staff with revised conditions as presented by the planning commission; 
(3)  Denial. 
(k)  The planning commission may move to table an item for a specified period of time in order to receive additional information necessary to make a recommendation to the mayor and city council. Should a request to table an item be made by the applicant and/or the property owner, the planning commission shall consider the request and if granted shall not table said request longer than for a period of 90 days. The 90-day period shall begin on the same day the action is made by the planning commission. If the tabled item is not returned within the prescribed period, the item shall then be automatically withdrawn and shall be required to follow the prescribed and established procedure to re-file applications before the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, §§ 3, 4, 8, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, §§ 3, 4, 8, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 2, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 2, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 2, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-79. - Parks and recreation. 
(a)  The parks and recreations commission shall consist of either three or five members who shall serve one-year terms, which shall begin on April 1 and end on March 31 of the following year. Members may serve successive terms. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or otherwise in this Code, the council shall establish qualifications for members of the parks and recreations commission. 
(b)  Each member shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of regularly scheduled meetings within their yearly term. Failure to do so warrants removal from the commission. 
(d)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. 
(e)  A consecutive appointment is permissible. If no replacement has been appointed at the end of a member's term, they may continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, except in such cases when a replacement has not been named due to a decrease in the number of members. 
(f)  Any member may be removed for cause by a vote of at least three members of the council. 
(g)  The parks and recreation commission may receive reimbursement for customary expenses previously approved and incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the parks and recreations commission. 
(h)  The parks and recreation commission shall meet in accordance with an established schedule of meetings as approved by the city council. The chair of the parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to cancel any meeting for which no action items or public hearings are scheduled on the agenda provided that notice of such cancellation must be given to the city clerk in sufficient time for the city clerk to provide public notice of such cancellation as required under state law. 
(i)  It shall be the function and duty of the parks and recreation commission to perform the following duties: 
(1)  Recommend to the mayor and city council policies and procedures for the use of city parks. 
(2)  Coordinate between and with volunteer groups that wish to coordinate use of the parks, improvements to the parks, and recreational uses of the parks. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding acquisition, improvement, maintenance, and operation of city parks. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, §§ 3, 4, 8, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, §§ 3, 4, 8, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 2, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 3, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 3, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-80. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual commission members establishes a quorum. Except as set forth herein, any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. A quorum is required for all commission meetings. In the event a quorum is not present at a previously scheduled meeting, the commission members in attendance at such meeting shall have the authority to set the next meeting date/time and shall have the right to notify, or caused to be notified, the absent members of such next meeting date/time. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 4, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, § 5, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, § 5, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 4, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 4, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 4, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-81. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each commission shall adopt the city council's rules and procedures as its own, except for those rules that govern the dates of meetings. Unless a meeting is cancelled as provided herein, the planning commission shall meet on a business day during the week which is one or two weeks immediately following the first Tuesday of each month. The parks commission may determine the date and time of its meetings, but shall meet no less than once every three months. The date and time of each commission meeting as well as agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of mayor and council. Regular commission meetings may be cancelled by the passage of a motion by a majority of a quorum of the commission acting during a meeting or individually by the chair of the commission without a meeting. All meeting cancellations shall be publicized in the same manner as meeting cancellations of mayor and council. 
(b)  Each of the commissions shall elect, annually, no later than the second meeting after the start of its annual term, two of its members to serve as chair and vice-chair, respectively. 
(c)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records unless expressly exempted by a provision of the Georgia Open Records Act. The commissions shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by the Georgia Open Meetings and Open Records Acts. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 4, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, § 6, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, § 6, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 5, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 5, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 5, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 5, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 14-05-120, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 2-82. - Training. 
The council may establish a mandatory training program for commission members. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 4, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 4, § 7, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 4, § 7, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-05-103, art. 4, § 6, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-06-106, art. 4, § 6, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 12-08-108, art. 4, § 6, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-109, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-83. - Historic commission. 
(a)  The historic commission shall be composed of not less than three members nor more than five members who shall serve one-year terms, which shall begin on April 1 and end on March 31 of the following year. Members may serve successive terms. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or otherwise in this Code, the council shall establish qualifications for members of the historic commission. 
(b)  Each member shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of regularly scheduled meetings within their yearly term. Failure to do so warrants removal from the historic commission. 
(d)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. 
(e)  A consecutive appointment is permissible. If no replacement has been appointed at the end of a member's term, they may continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, except in such cases when a replacement has not been named due to a decrease in the number of members. 
(f)  Any member may be removed for cause by a vote of at least three members of the city council. 
(g)  The historic commission members may receive reimbursement for customary expenses previously approved and incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the historic commission. 
(h)  The historic commission shall meet in accordance with an established schedule of meetings as approved by the city council. The chair of the historic commission shall have the authority to cancel any meeting for which no action items or public hearings are scheduled on the agenda provided that notice of such cancellation must be given to the city clerk in sufficient time for the city clerk to provide public notice of such cancellation as required under state law. 
(i)  The powers and responsibilities of the historic commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of any property within the city that meets that criteria for consideration as a historic resource, which includes buildings, structures, objects, sites or districts that: 
a.  Are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history, or 
b.  Are associated with the lives of significant persons in our past, or 
c.  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
d.  Have yielded or may be likely to yield, information important to history or pre-history. 
(2)  Advise on the restoration or preservation of any historic properties acquired by the city. 
(3)  Conduct an education program on historic properties located within the city. 
(4)  Make investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the city council may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate. 
(5)  Seek out state, federal or private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the city council for the use of funds acquired. 
(6)  Promote the use of long-term conservation and preservation mechanisms including conservation easements and transfer or purchase of development rights. 
(7)  Undertake identification and mapping of gravesites, cemeteries and burial grounds in the city. 
(8)  Identify and make recommendations for the preservation of scenic viewsheds and other elements of the cultural landscape that contribute to the unique rural environment of the city as described in the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, and other city documents. 
( Ord. No. 19-02-191 , § 2, 2-5-2019) 
Secs. 2-84—2-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY FINANCE 

Sec. 2-108. - City accountant. 
(a)  The mayor and city manager shall nominate a city accountant, subject to ratification by the council. The city accountant may also serve as the city treasurer, city tax collector, and city finance director. Unless otherwise specified, the terms "city accountant," "city treasurer," and "city tax collector" are used interchangeably in this Code. 
(b)  The city may contract with a third party to serve as city accountant. 
(c)  The city accountant shall perform at least the following duties. 
(1)  Managing, planning, directing, and maintaining the city's financial operations, including serving as chair of the city finance department, if such a department is established; 
(2)  Directing and supervising the work of personnel involved in performing the accounting, utility billing, property tax, payroll, and purchasing functions for the city; and 
(3)  Providing technical leadership in budgeting, overseeing and directing investment opportunities and debt administration, as well as ensuring proper record retention policies are strictly followed. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 5, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 5, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 5, § 1, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-109. - City tax collector. 
(a)  The mayor and city manager shall nominate a city tax collector, subject to ratification by the council. The city tax collector also may serve as the city treasurer, city accountant, and city finance director. 
(b)  The city may contract with a third party, including the tax commissioner of the county, to serve as city tax collector. 
(c)  The city tax collector shall perform at least the following duties. 
(1)  Managing, planning, and directing the collection of all city taxes. 
(2)  Notifying delinquent taxpayers of their status in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-02, art. 5, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-26, art. 5, § 2, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 5, § 2, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-110—2-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-132. - City manager to establish policies. 
The city manager shall establish policies by ordinance for purchasing that include, but are not limited to, authority for purchasing, purchasing thresholds, competitive purchasing, purchasing ethics, emergency purchasing provisions, inventory control, surplus property, contracting, and change orders. The purchasing procedures will be updated from time to time as required by federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-80, art. 6, 12-7-2010) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOL BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcohol beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent possible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcohol beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 1, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 1, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcohol Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1 to 3-12-3. 
(b)  As used in this chapter the singular and the plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(d)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Alcohol beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to the alcohol beverage ordinance of the city who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city, or his designate. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
City means the City of Chattahoochee Hills and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the city. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Home brew special event means and includes those events permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(e), as may be amended, for instruction or for contests, tastings and judgings. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to the law of the state. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Registered agent means that individual, who is a resident of the county and at least 21 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon a licensee or owner. 
Special event means a concert, sporting event, festival, parade or such other event which is open to those who pay an admission fee or receive permission to participate in the event to the organizer of the event which occurs in a special events facility for no more than ten days in a two-week period of time. 
Special events facility means an enclosed structure, open area, or space with a logically defined perimeter, and/or enclosed by a fence, wall, or other means with the intent of controlling ingress/egress. 
Special large events means and includes those events in which more than 500 people are anticipated to attend in a single calendar day. 
Special small events means and includes those events in which 500 people or less are anticipated to attend in a single calendar day. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 1, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 1, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 1, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-3. - General penalty. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, any person who violates an ordinance contained herein may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or up to six months' incarceration. Should the violation and conviction be of a state law, the punishment shall be by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and/or up to 12 months' incarceration. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 9, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 9, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 9, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 4-4—4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-25. - License required. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispense any alcohol beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall have printed on the front "This license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled and is subject to the laws of Georgia and the existing and any further ordinances of the city." 
(c)  The applicant for a license or permit, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and to all city ordinances and regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises of alcohol beverages, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Malt beverages may be produced in private residences, consumed in private residences and transported from private residences pursuant to the requirements and within the restrictions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4, as may be amended. 
(e)  A resident of the city may conduct a home brew special event under a permit issued by the city pursuant to the requirements and within the restrictions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(e), as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 3, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-26. - Retail package licenses. 
Applicants may apply for one or more of the following type retail licenses: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license. Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package. 
(2)  Package wine license. Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license. Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package. 
(4)  Ancillary wine tasting provisions. 
a.  The holder of a malt beverage and/or wine-only package store license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine/beer tasting license, respectively, to provide samples of wine/beer offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this chapter. 
b.  Wine/beer sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine/beer offered for sale within the premises or in conjunction with wine/beer education classes and sampling designed to promote wine/beer appreciation and education. 
c.  Wine/beer tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
d.  Wine/beer sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
e.  No open containers of wine or beer shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
f.  Wine/beer sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per week for a period not to exceed a consecutive two-hour period in any one day. 
g.  Samples shall not exceed two ounces and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
h.  Wine and/or beer bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee and samples shall only be poured by the licensee or an employee. 
i.  Holders of an ancillary wine/beer tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tasting but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
j.  There will be an annual fee to obtain an ancillary wine/beer tasting permit and the fee shall be set forth in the alcohol beverage license fee schedule and subject to change from time to time. 
The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by the city council. 
(5)  Special event package malt beverage license. Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package at special events. 
(6)  Special event package wine license. Retail sale of wine in the original container or package at special events. 
(7)  Special event package distilled spirits license. Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original container or package at special events. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 2, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 4-27. - Retail consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)  Eight classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, retail consumption on the premises licenses are available only to eating establishments. 
(1)  Full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink. 
(2)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(4)  Brewpub. See section 4-2. 
(5)  Farm winery tasting room. See section 4-194. 
(6)  Special events full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink at special small events. 
(7)  Special events full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink at special large events. 
(8)  Special events limited pouring license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink at special small events. 
(9)  Special events limited pouring license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink at special large events. 
(10)  Special events limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink at special small events. 
(11)  Special events limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink at special small events. 
(12)  Special events limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink at special large events. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. Sunday sales may be made, provided the licensee otherwise meets the qualifying requirements for Sunday sales. Service from more than one bar at a licensed location may be made upon payment of an additional fee per bar. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 3, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 4, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-28. - Wholesale licenses. 
(a)  Any wholesale dealer in alcohol beverages who is licensed by the state and who does not have a place of business in the city shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the city manager, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that he understands the alcohol beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the city shall pay a registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in alcohol beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. The application for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-29. - Alcohol beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements, resident caterers. 
(1)  Any alcohol beverage caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at authorized catered events or functions. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale of alcohol beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event of function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(4)  Any caterer may dispense alcohol beverages without a license provided that the caterer does not sell the alcohol to either the host of the catered event or to the guests of the catered event. 
(5)  All employees or others acting for the caterer must possess a valid pouring permit as provided in this chapter if the employee or other such person is selling or dispensing alcohol beverages. 
(b)  Permit requirements, nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event, which may be a single-day or multiple-day event that does not exceed more than 30 consecutive days, to the city manager. If the nonresident caterer will sell alcohol to either the host of the catered event or to the guests of the catered event, the nonresident caterer must possess a valid license from another jurisdiction in the state for pouring alcohol beverages. The fee for each such permit shall be the maximum authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3, as amended. Once the application has been approved by the city manager and the fee submitted to the city, the nonresident caterer shall be an alcohol beverage caterer for the event or function as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcohol beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
(3)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcohol beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for an alcohol beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcohol beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(5)  All employees or others acting for the alcohol beverage caterer must possess a valid pouring permit as provided in this chapter if the employee or other such person is selling or dispensing alcohol beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcohol beverage caterer may sell only that alcohol beverage which is authorized by the alcohol beverage license issued to the caterer by the city or other licensing agency. 
(d)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcohol beverages by a resident caterer as provided in this chapter. 
(e)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcohol beverages served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 5, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 5, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-30. - Non-profit civic organization temporary permit. 
(a)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcohol beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a non-profit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  Temporary permits may be issued to non-profit organizations pursuant to the requirements and within the restrictions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-9-3, as may be amended. Fees assessed for such permits for events that are scheduled to attract less than 500 attendees shall be set as determined by the city council. Fees assessed for such permits for events that are scheduled to attract 500 or more attendees shall be identical to those set for a special large event pouring license. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 6, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 2, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-31. - Duration of licenses. 
All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar year basis, and all licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received on and between January 1 and June 30 shall be assessed the full license fee. New applications received on and between July 1 and December 31 shall be assessed one-half of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 7, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-32. - Individual, business or association entities; named licensee. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of the partner or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the stockholder, officer of the corporation, or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a purely nonprofit civic, fraternal, patriotic, private, or social club or corporation which is organized and conducted in the city solely as a mutual benefit membership group, shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter, and the named individual shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  The individual completing and presenting an application for a license, whether for himself, a partnership, a corporation, or a nonprofit organization shall meet the requirements of this chapter so as to be the named licensee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 8, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 8, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-33. - Joint responsibility. 
(a)  If a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(b)  If a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(c)  If a nonprofit organization, its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 9, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 9, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 9, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-34. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  Every applicant shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and the application shall constitute a certification that the applicant has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcohol beverages concerning the relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or full-time employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(c)  A licensee must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, a licensee for the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package must have been a resident of a county or municipality in the state, in which the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package is legal, for one year immediately preceding the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No person, including members of a retail dealer licensee's immediate family, shall be issued, nor shall have a beneficial interest in, more than two package distilled spirits licenses issued in this state. 
(f)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the ten years preceding his application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any sexual related crime, or any criminal offense relating to alcohol beverages, taxes, or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(g)  A licensee shall not have had revoked, within the five years preceding his application, any license to sell alcohol beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(h)  A licensee shall have, and continuously maintain, as a registered agent a resident of the county upon whom may be served any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. The registered agent must be a resident of at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 10, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 10, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 10, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-35. - Application fee and advertising requirements. 
(a)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(b)  All applications for alcohol beverage permits shall be approved by the city council. License applicants shall be required to meet all public hearing advertising notice requirements as follows: 
(1)  The applicant for an original license shall, at his own expense, post a notice on the premises to be licensed. The notice shall be posted for at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall be on a sign having a surface of not less than 12 square feet. The notice shall be painted or printed in black letters at least three inches in height against a white background. The notice shall state: 
a.  That an application for a license to sell alcohol beverages on the premises has been filed with the city; 
b.  The type of license applied for; 
c.  The time and place of the public hearing to be held on such license application; and 
d.  The names in which the license is to be issued. 
(2)  The advertisement shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street or highway abutting same, and not more than ten feet therefrom. 
(3)  The city clerk shall prepare and cause to be published a notice of each pending application, which notice shall include the date the application will be considered by the city council, the location or street number of the premises where the applicant proposes to conduct activities permitted by this chapter and the name of the applicant. The applicant shall pay as part of the application and advertising fee to cover the cost associated with advertising the public hearing. The notice shall be published in the city's legal organ and shall appear once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application by the city council. 
(4)  The license shall be issued following the approval of the ordinance by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 11, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 11, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 11, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-36. - Application; investigation consent. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and, further, shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(2)  If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(3)  The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Each applicant and licensee shall consent to and authorize a fingerprint analysis and investigation. 
(c)  The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, or proof of ownership of the premises, or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(d)  Each applicant and licensee authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(e)  Separate applications must be made for each location, and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 12, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 12, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 12, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-37. - Procedure for consideration of application; temporary licenses. 
(a)  The city manager shall promptly refer a copy of each application to the chief of police or his designee for a thorough investigation. The chief of police or his designee shall report his findings to the city manager. Such finding shall include a recommendation as to the qualifications of the applicant. The city manager shall further have the responsibility and authority to request additional information as may be determined to be necessary in order for the city manager to accept the application as complete prior to its submission to the city council. 
(b)  A temporary license for a full pouring license, a limited pouring license, package malt beverage license, and package wine license may be issued by the city manager for a period of up to 60 days, provided the city manager is satisfied that the applicant substantially complies with the provisions of the applicable ordinances and meets required qualifications and the denial of a temporary license would create undue hardship upon the applicant, such as the closing of an existing business or delaying of the opening of a new business. The applicant shall sign an acknowledgment that the temporary license is a mere accommodation and may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city manager at any time. 
(c)  The fee for issuance of a temporary license shall be set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 13, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 13, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 13, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-38. - Denial of application. 
(a)  After a hearing, should the city council deny an application, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager, shall set forth the reasons for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal. 
(b)  Any decision by the city council denying an application shall be final unless the applicant applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(c)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 14, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 14, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 14, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-39. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. All applications seeking a transfer of a license in any respect shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in an amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensed premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of the death of an owner of a license, no sale of alcohol beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall apply to the city manager for authorization. The establishment shall then be allowed to continue to operate for a period of 60 days from the date of death, until expiration of the license, or until the approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)  A change in ownership status of the licensed establishment that does not change the actual ownership interest shall be eligible to apply for a transfer of license as provided herein. By way of example, a sole proprietor who decides to incorporate and be the sole shareholder of the new corporation, although in such circumstances information required from a corporation in an original application shall be provided. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided, such withdrawal shall not introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business without application for and issuance of a new license. 
(f)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcohol beverages, a change in the named individual licensee may be permitted by the city manager if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(g)  In the circumstances described in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 15, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 15, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 15, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-40. - Sale or disposition of licensed business; temporary license. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city manager. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, the city manager may issue a temporary license as provided in section 4-37 to the successor in interest, if the successor in interest has properly completed an application and paid the appropriate fee. The temporary license shall be valid for up to 60 days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the city council, which ever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 16, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 16, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 16, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-41. - License renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal shall be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city manager, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, including background and criminal history data, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be filed no later than November 15 and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in the amount as set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Renewal applications and payments not received by November 15 shall incur a late fee. Renewal applications and payments received between November 16 and December 15 are subject to a ten percent late fee. Businesses failing to apply for renewal of their licenses prior to December 15 must reapply for a license, in which the application will be treated as if no previous license had been held, including reviewing appropriate investigative, zoning, and distance requirements. 
(d)  Businesses required to reapply for a license, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, and filing this application for a new license after January 1 shall pay at the time of filing the required application fee, the annual fee, and the ten percent late fee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 17, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 17, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 17, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-42. - Notice. 
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any required notice may be delivered by hand or posted by certified mail, in which event delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 18, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 18, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 18, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-43. - Collection of sums due. 
As to any failure to pay any sum due for fees or taxes under this chapter, the city may issue an execution against the licensee and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax in addition to any other remedies the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 2, § 19, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 2, § 19, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 2, § 19, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 4-44—4-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING 

Sec. 4-75. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcohol beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)  When suspension of a license is permitted under this chapter, but no specific period of suspension is mandated, the following guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  First suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 30 days. 
(2)  Second suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 60 days. 
(3)  Third suspension in a 12-month period of time shall cause revocation of the license and result in the inability of the licensee to obtain a license from the city for a term of three years from the date of revocation. 
(c)  Prior to the suspension or revocation of a license by the city, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing before the city alcohol license review board shall be held in accordance with section 4-76. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent. If personal service fails, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agent at the address provided and to the named licensee at the licensed premises. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 3, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 3, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-76. - License review board: hearings. 
(a)  There is hereby established a license review board ("board") consisting of five members appointed by the mayor and subject to approval by the council. Each member shall serve a term of four years, except that upon appointment of the initial members of the board, the initial terms may be staggered. 
(b)  The board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear deferred applications or appeals from administrative decisions by the city manager with regard to issuance, suspensions, or revocation of licenses, transfers, renewals, change of ownership, or other matters affecting such licenses or decisions by the city manager pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  To hear appeals with regard to issuance or renewal of employee pouring permits. 
(3)  To hear any matter involving revocation or suspension or a license or other disciplinary action against a licensee or employee under a pouring permit. 
(4)  To consider and act upon any other matter specifically delegated to the board by city ordinance, resolution, or action of the council. 
(c)  Applicants or licensees shall be given written notice of the date, time and place when the board will consider the respective matter. The applicant and interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by the board and present evidence to the board prior to making its decision. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, no alcohol beverage license having been issued shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as defined in this section, until after a hearing and upon written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. Ten days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board may deem the circumstances to justify. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of a license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the business; the violation of any state or federal law; any reason which would authorize the city to refuse the issuance of a license; or any violation of this chapter. Further, the police department shall notify the city manager if the licensee or anyone in the employ of a licensee is: 
(1)  Being charged with or arrested for selling alcohol beverages: 
a.  To an underage person; 
b.  On Sunday without necessary Sunday sales license; or 
(2)  Being convicted of selling alcohol beverages to an intoxicated person pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22 during the current license year. Once the city manager becomes aware of such charge, arrest, or conviction, he shall place the matter before the board for hearing. The board, at said hearing and after receiving evidence, may order the license to sell or serve alcohol beverages be suspended or revoked if the evidence so warrants. All decisions of the board shall be in writing, and a copy shall be furnished to the applicant or licensee. 
(d)  The board shall have the authority to hear or determine any matter set forth in this chapter unless specifically prohibited therefrom. 
(e)  Upon close of the public hearing, the board shall reach a decision on the matter before it, and the decision of the board shall be final unless the applicant, licensee, or permit holder appeals the decision to the city council within ten days of the date of its written decision. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. Within 30 days of the filing of the appeal and at a regularly scheduled meeting, the council shall conduct a de novo hearing to hear evidence and, at the conclusion of such hearing, shall render a decision to uphold the decision made by the board, reverse the decision made by the board, or in its discretion, modify the decision made by the board. 
(f)  The decision of the council as rendered on an appeal under this article shall be final unless the applicant, licensee or permit holder applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the council. 
(g)  The board shall meet at such times as necessary as determined by the board and shall render its decisions within 30 days after the close of a hearing on any matter. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and all decisions of the board shall require a majority vote of the quorum. Such meeting shall not be scheduled later than 30 days from the time a matter is filed for hearing or appealed to the board. 
(h)  The board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and one member to serve as secretary, both to serve at the pleasure of the board. Minutes and records of all proceedings shall be kept and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 3, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 3, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 4-77—4-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCATION OF SALES 

Sec. 4-96. - Distance from churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No package malt beverage license, package wine license, or consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and malt beverages, or consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(b)  No package distilled spirits license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any church building or alcohol treatment center or which is located within 200 yards of a school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus or which is located within 500 yards of another licensed package distilled spirits business. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of package distilled spirits was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure, as determined by the director of community development, from which alcohol beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; 
(2)  In a straight path of travel by the nearest public sidewalk, street, road, or highway; and 
(3)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, as determined by the director of community development, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(d)  No application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a current certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcohol beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements, where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcohol beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this section, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(e)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (d) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet the requirements of this section. 
(f)  If the distance requirements of this section are met at the time a license is issued, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the prohibited distance shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to a subsequent owner of the property. 
(g)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at any other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 4, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 4, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 4, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 13-03-114, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 4-97. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense any alcohol beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city manager to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcohol beverages on property owned or leased by the city. 
(c)  An outdoor festival host holding the required special event permit may allow or prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival in a city park and shall have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such authorization and/or limitations shall be set forth on the application for the special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 4, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 4, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 4, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-98. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcohol beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)  A retail consumption on the premises licensee may sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcohol beverages in a patio/open area type environment or in an area where the licensee normally serves patrons. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcohol beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention, or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 4, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 4, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 4, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 4, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 6, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-99. - Consumption of alcohol beverages on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Except for areas and circumstances specified in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an alcohol beverage in an open container, either on their person, in a motor vehicle or otherwise on the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(b)  Within those areas lying in the Hamlet (HM), Village (VL), or Town (TN) zoning districts, retail consumption on the premises licensees may sell one alcohol beverage in a paper or plastic cup for removal from the premises; provided that the alcohol beverage is not placed in a can, bottle or other glass container; and further provided that the licensee shall not dispense more than one such alcohol beverage per person and no person shall remove more than one alcohol beverage from the premises; and further provided that the alcohol beverage is not consumed or transported in a motor vehicle. 
(c)  Any alcohol beverage dispensed pursuant to this section shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size and no person shall possess an open container containing an alcohol beverage in excess of 16 fluid ounces on the streets or sidewalks in the areas permitted in this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 7, 8-2-2016) 
Secs. 4-100—4-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-125. - Rent based on sales volume prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for a licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcohol beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the sale of alcohol beverages by the licensed business. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcohol beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(c)  The city manager may, for good cause being shown, grant a licensee an exemption from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-126. - Display of license. 
Except as provided herein, each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in the public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. Each special events license shall be maintained at the local office of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 5, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 4-127. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcohol beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcohol beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records, more specifically described in subsection (c) of this section, shall at all times be open for inspection by the city manager or his designee. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager determines that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensee to require the keeping of such records. 
(b)  If the city manager deems it advisable to conduct an audit of the records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city manager may designate the city's internal auditor or other person to perform the audit, and the licensee shall cooperate with the audit or be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(c)  At the request of the city manager or his designee, the licensee shall make available the following records required to be kept for at least three years: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal income tax returns with all Form 1099s. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 3, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-128. - Sale to, purchase or possession by underage person. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcohol beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcohol beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcohol beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcohol beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcohol beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcohol beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply when the parent or guardian of the underage person gives the alcohol beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcohol beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, the person's photograph, and the person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A., §§ 40-5-100—40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in a licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 4-156. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could doubt whether or not the person to whom an alcohol beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is 21 years of age or older, the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcohol beverage shall request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcohol beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcohol beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(g)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcohol beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcohol beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcohol beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(h)  For purposes of the prohibitions set forth in this section, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(i)  With reference to the prohibitions set forth in this section, if there is a change in a majority of a licensee's owners, partners, or shareholders, the offenses under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; provided, however, a different corporation, partnership, or other association shall be charged with the offenses of the predecessor if a majority of the owners, partners, or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-129. - Days when sales unlawful. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcohol beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. For example, the sale of alcohol beverages on any election day, holidays, and Sundays is limited as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7 and 3-3-20. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted in section 4-130(a), no licensee shall permit the sale of alcohol beverages on Sunday unless such licensee is a bona fide eating establishment, caterer, private club, or special events facility as defined in this chapter and any requisite fee for Sunday sales is paid, the amount of which shall be set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 5, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 11-12-98, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 4-130. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Package licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcohol beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. Package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday, except that where the primary business of a malt beverage package licensee or wine package licensee is other than the sale of alcohol beverages, such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall engage in the sale of alcohol beverages only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. Sunday sales may be made by eating establishments, as defined herein, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, provided application for Sunday sales is made and the fee paid. Sunday sales may be made at any time in private clubs provided application for Sunday sales is made and the fee paid. 
(c)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 6, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 11-12-98, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 4-131. - Prohibited acts, sexual display on licensed premises. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcohol beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any: disorderly conduct; breach of the peace; lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices; or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and genitals. 
(e)  No licensee shall allow live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (d) of this section, or where such person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act prohibited by law. 
(2)  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
(3)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
(f)  No licensee shall allow the use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described above in subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
(h)  No licensee shall allow to be shown, displayed, or exhibited any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or image of any act or conduct described above in subsection (e) of this section. 
(i)  Nothing contained in subsections (d) through (h) of this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcohol beverages. A mainstream performance house means a building where conventional performances are presented. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 7, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-132. - Delivery and storage. 
(a)  Alcohol beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler) with a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city. Alcohol beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcohol beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Any alcohol beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 8, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 8, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-133. - On-premises consumption unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcohol beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcohol beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 9, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 9, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 9, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-134. - Regulation of signs and lighting. 
(a)  Signs advertising, promoting the use of, or otherwise related to alcohol beverages may not be installed such that they may be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The exterior of each building in which alcohol beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 10, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 10, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 10, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-135. - Condition of premises requirements. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police, the fire chief, and other authorized agents of the city and the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 11, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 11, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 11, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-136. - Change of ownership, profit distribution report required. 
A licensee shall file with the city manager a written, sworn report of any of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change in any legal relationship between any parties named in the application for the license; 
(2)  Any change in the payment of rent for leased premises or any change in the ownership of the licensed premises; 
(3)  Any loss or damage to goods or premises of the licensee which results in a claim against an insurance policy; 
(4)  Any change for any purpose in division of net or gross sales of the licensed business; and 
(5)  Any change in any material facts contained in the application for the license. 
Such report shall be filed within five days after the date the change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 5, § 12, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 5, § 12, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 5, § 12, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 4-137—4-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS AND HANDLING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-156. - Age requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcohol beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcohol beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcohol beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcohol beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcohol beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcohol beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term "grocery stores or supermarkets" shall not include convenience stores. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 6, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 6, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 6, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-157. - Handling not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 6, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 6, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 6, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-158. - Pouring permit required. 
(a)  An employee pouring permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee who dispenses, sells, serves, takes orders, mixes beverages, or serves in any managerial position; and 
(2)  Any employee of an alcohol beverage caterer who is engaged in handling, selling, or serving alcohol beverages; provided, however, employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cooks or dishwashers shall be excluded. 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have a pouring permit until such person has procured such permit. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain a pouring permit shall apply to the city for such permit. Only one pouring permit per individual will be issued for employment at any and all establishments within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other investigation as may be required by the police department. The fee for a pouring permit shall be set by way of the adoption of the city's annual budget, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent budgets adopted by the city council. 
(d)  The chief of police may revoke an employee's pouring permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(e)  Any conviction for violation of the provisions of this article or of the state's Alcohol Beverage Code shall result in the automatic suspension of the pouring permit. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose pouring permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(g)  When a person applies for a pouring permit, the chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and extensive search made to determine if there is a police record of such person. If there is a record of conduct prohibited by this chapter or evidence that the person's employment would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, issuance of a permit shall be denied. 
(h)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an employee pouring permit if the chief of police receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the card, the card may be revoked following notice and a hearing. 
(i)  When any employee's pouring permit is denied or revoked, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this chapter and that upon request the chief of police will refer the matter and any evidence the person cares to submit in his behalf to the city manager for consideration. If the person requests consideration by the city manager, the entire record will be sent. The city manager shall consider all matters presented and make a decision as to whether the person qualifies for a pouring permit under this chapter. In the event the city manager denies the permit, he shall provide written notice of the denial to the applicant or employee, which shall set forth the reasons for the denial. The applicant shall have a right of review of the denial by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia, within 30 days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 6, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 6, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 6, § 3, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-159. - Licensee to report disciplinary action. 
Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcohol beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police and the city manager of such action within five days of such action. The following shall be considered to be disciplinary action: any arrest; the issuance of any citation; any indictment, presentment, or accusation; any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the licensee or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to citations for traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 6, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 6, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 6, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 4-160—4-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES LICENSES 

Sec. 4-187. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(b)  Full service kitchen as used in this article shall mean a kitchen with a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health and city fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-188. - Hotel and hotel room service. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license a hotel must be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay and also be either one of the following: 
(1)  A bed and breakfast, defined for purposes of this article as a private residence where no more than six rooms are set aside for paid overnight guests and where the owner resides; 
(2)  A country inn, defined for purposes of this article as containing up to 30 rooms used for sleeping accommodations of guests and containing one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities; or 
(3)  A hotel containing 50 or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of guests and containing one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  A hotel may grant permission for the operation of a lounge, restaurant, or supper club on its premises; such an operation may be granted a consumption on the premises license if it meets the other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term "hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of this section), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide "in-room service" of alcohol beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide in-room service by the state revenue commissioner. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, in-room service consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcohol beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcohol beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcohol beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcohol beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcohol beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcohol beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcohol beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcohol beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcohol beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(h)  Distilled spirits sold pursuant to this section shall not be sold in packages containing less than 50 milliliters each. 
(i)  All alcohol beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on the retail sale by the drink of alcohol beverages containing distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-189. - Restaurant. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(4)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales be the sale of food and nonalcohol beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(b)  Brewpubs, as defined in section 4-2 and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3), shall be allowed in eating establishments. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 3, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-190. - Lounge. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room that has a seating capacity, at tables, of at least 50 persons and which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor, or in a separate building, from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-191. - Supper club. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a supper club must: 
(1)  Have a seating capacity, at tables, of at least 100 persons; 
(2)  Have adequate and sanitary full service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its patrons, except that this requirement shall not apply to a supper club which is located in a hotel having separate kitchen facilities of which the supper club makes use; 
(3)  Provide a band or other professional entertainment a minimum of 20 days in each calendar month, each and every calendar month of the calendar year, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(4)  Be arranged and maintained such that all booths and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(5)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(6)  Have as at least 50 percent of its total sales the sale of food and nonalcohol beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines; and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 5, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-192. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of this state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcohol beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4) of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcohol beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcohol beverages. 
(c)  No alcohol beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcohol beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcohol beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 6, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-193. - Special events facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(1)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; and 
(2)  For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including, but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; and 
(3)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; or 
(4)  Be a multi-sport complex situated on at least 20 acres and in conformance with the city's zoning ordinances; or 
(5)  Be an enclosed open area or structure with controlled ingress/egress. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 7, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-08-143, § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 4-194. - Farm winery tasting room. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Special entertainment district means a certain area within the city designated by mayor and council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(b)  There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a Georgia farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the state and the city. 
(c)  Under this section, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room in the licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, upon application, a certain location may be designated by the mayor and council as a special entertainment district pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
(d)  The farm winery tasting room created by this section is limited to farm wineries licensed by the state and allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. No license is created by this section authorizing any other person to deal in any other alcohol beverage. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 8, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 8, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-195. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcohol beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(3)  Private clubs; or 
(4)  Special events facilities. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 9, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 9, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 9, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-196. - Employees of supper club or lounge not to mingle with customers. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a supper club or lounge to dance or sit with customers on the premises. It shall be unlawful for any customer to purchase food or drink for an employee of a lounge or supper club on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 10, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 10, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 10, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-197. - Live music and dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the fire chief has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 11, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 11, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 11, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-198. - Purchase of alcohol beverages by licensee. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of 0.750 of a liter or larger, except for single serve bottles, unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers, in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the next smallest to such size containers. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 12, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 12, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 12, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-199. - Package sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any alcohol beverages to be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 13, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 13, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 13, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-200. - Carry-out of alcohol beverage unlawful. 
(a)  All alcohol beverages sold or otherwise dispensed by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 governing the removal of one unsealed bottle of wine per patron. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcohol beverages sold for consumption on the premises except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4, and it shall be unlawful for the licensee to permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcohol beverages sold for consumption on the premises except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person removes any alcohol beverages from the premises in any type of container except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing alcohol beverages for consumption on the premises to leave the premises without paying for such alcohol beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for customers to gather outside the establishment of a consumption on the premises licensee and consume alcohol beverages. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the manager or any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee to allow persons to gather outside the establishment and consume alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 14, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 14, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 14, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 8, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 4-201. - Happy hour discounts; other unlawful practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcohol beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcohol beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcohol beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcohol beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcohol beverages a customer can or desires to drink; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of no more than four types of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces each; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcohol beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one alcohol beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcohol beverage at the same time another alcohol beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than 1½ ounces of distilled spirits; 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 7, § 16, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 7, § 16, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 7, § 16, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-202. - Carry-in of wine. 
If permitted by the licensee, a patron may carry in unopened bottles of wine to premises licensed for retail consumption on the premises which may be opened and served by the licensee or his employees who possess a pouring permit. The licensee is permitted to charge a fee for opening the bottles and may limit the number of bottles carried in by each patron or group of patrons. 
(Ord. No. 16-08-158, § 9, 8-2-2016) 
Secs. 4-203—4-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 4-226. - Tax imposed on sale of drinks containing distilled spirits. 
There is imposed upon the retail sale of drinks containing distilled spirits in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the drink to the consumer. A record of each sale shall be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-227. - Licensee to collect and remit. 
Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of drinks containing distilled spirits. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the finance department of the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-228. - Customer receipts; credit sales. 
If requested by the purchaser, a consumption on the premises licensee shall give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and the tax imposed by this article shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the drink to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 3, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-229. - Payment and returns by licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the finance department of the city by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the city may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of drinks containing distilled spirits and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Any amounts collected in excess of three percent of the taxable sales shall be reported and paid to the city. 
(c)  Licensees shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-230. - Excise tax; wholesalers. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the alcohol beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. Remittances shall be accompanied by completed forms as prescribed or authorized by the finance department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 5, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-231. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, the city may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)  The city shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 6, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-232. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by section 4-231(c). 
(b)  If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 7, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-233. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 8, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 8, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-234. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the city approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 9, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 9, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 9, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 4-235. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The finance department of the city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)  The finance department of the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcohol beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)  In the administration of the provisions of this article, the finance department of the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-06, art. 8, § 10, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-30, art. 8, § 10, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 10-05-72, art. 8, § 10, 5-4-2010) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Introduction. 
Fulton County, as required by the transition language in section 6.02 of the Charter of the city and O.C.G.A. § 36-31-8, shall continue to provide administration, enforcement and oversight of this chapter, the city's animal control ordinance, until November 30, 2009, or until such time as the city determines to administer, enforce and oversee this chapter on its own, whichever shall occur first. After the designated transition period ending on November 30, 2009, or before that date should the city decide to take over the administration, enforcement and oversight of this chapter, the city continues to reserve the right to contract through an intergovernmental agreement with any county or municipality in the state sharing a geographical border with the city for the administration, enforcement and oversight of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means "dog control officer" and shall refer to an individual employed by the health department or its designee to perform and execute the provisions of this article, and his office shall have the power to issue citations in violation of this chapter, and as deputized by the city police chief, county police chief or county sheriff. 
Animal control shelter means the facilities operated by the health department or its designee for the confining of dogs, cats, or other animals impounded under the provisions of this article. 
Cat means cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Commercial guard/security dog means any dog that is purchased, leased, or rented and that is trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any commercial property, public or private, upon and within which it is located. 
Current vaccination/license tag means a vaccination/license tag bearing a number which shows the license is valid for a one- or three-year period. The licensing period runs concurrently with the vaccination period. 
Custodian means any person which has been entrusted with the responsibility and care of a dog, cat, or other animal by its owner. 
Dangerous dog. 
(1)  The term "dangerous dog" means any dog that according to the records of any appropriate authority: 
a.  Inflicts a severe injury on a human without provocation on public or private property; or 
b.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
(2)  Exception. A dog is not considered potentially dangerous or dangerous if it bites a human: 
a.  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  When its owner is being attacked. 
c.  Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
d.  Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
Dog means dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Domestic animal/fowl means any animal/fowl domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition for the advantage of humans. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the state and may be kept in the state as pets. 
Exotic animal means any animal of any kind which is not indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
Harborer means any person which has provided sustenance and/or shelter to a dog, cat, or other animal for a period of more than seven days. 
Health department means the commissioner of health of the city or the county, or his authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of the Atlanta Humane Society so long as such corporation is under contract with the county. The term "health department" may also mean a health department of any county or municipality providing administration, enforcement and oversight of this chapter through an intergovernmental agreement with the city. 
Livestock means horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, and all other animals used or suitable for either food or labor. 
Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
Person means person, firm, corporation, municipality, society, or association. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human on public or private property at any time. 
Records means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer. 
Single premises means a tract of land with the buildings thereon, a building or part of a building with its appurtenances (as grounds). 
Vaccinate means intermuscular injection, by a veterinarian, of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine to an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number of approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. Vaccine used for vaccination of dogs, cats, or other animals against rabies shall be refrigerated and kept under proper conditions and shall show no signs of spoilage or otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
Vaccination certificate means a certificate provided by the state department of human resources and issued at the time of vaccination of the dog, cat, or other animal and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator; the name, color, breed, age, and sex of the dog, cat, or other animal; the name and address of the owner; the date of expiration of the vaccination; and the spay or neuter status, if known. 
Vaccination/license tag means a metal tag bearing a number which is issued to the animal owner after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. This tag is issued on behalf of the city by the designated health department or its designee and is provided by the state department of human resources. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state; the veterinary license number shall be the same as that recorded by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
Vicious animal. 
(1)  The term "vicious animal" means any animal which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation; or an animal which has on one or more occasions caused physical injury to humans or other animals without provocation, whether on public or private property. 
(2)  Exception. An animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites, or menaces: 
a.  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  Anyone attacking the owner. 
c.  Unlawful trespassers on the property of the owner. 
d.  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it. 
e.  If it is defending its young or other animal. 
Wildlife/fowl means any animal/fowl of any kind which is indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl which is part wild animal/fowl. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine of up to the maximum amount provided for by state law and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed the maximum amount provided for by state law or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a potentially dangerous dog will be fined not less than $150.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $300.00 for a third conviction and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed six months, or both. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of an ordinance violation of a high and aggravated nature and will be fined not less than $500.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $750.00 for a third conviction and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed six months or both. 
(d)  If an owner of a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 6-61 and his dog attacks or bites a human or aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, the animal control officer shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the health department and thereafter humanely destroyed. This shall be in addition to any other punishment proscribed for such violation under state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-4. - Courts. 
The city municipal court or the courts having general jurisdiction wherein the city has a contractual agreement for providing animal control services shall hear cases and assess fines for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-5. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The city police department, county health department, county sheriff's department or county police department, or their designees, shall enforce this chapter by means of impoundment and court citations. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-6. - Vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in the territorial boundaries of the city, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the county animal control for a vaccination/license tag. 
(b)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this chapter. The vaccination/license tag will be available to the public throughout the year and is issued on behalf of the city by the health department or its designee. The tag shall be valid for the same period as the time specified by the vaccination. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog in the areas designated in subsection (a) of this section to affix such vaccination/license tag to a collar worn by the dog at all times, except that the wearing of a vaccination/license tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat, and except when dogs are boarded in kennels or veterinary clinics, or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner or custodian of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner, custodian, or harborer shall have the tag or vaccination certificate in his possession where it may be shown on demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(d)  Should the vaccination/license tag become lost, misplaced, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of the dog or cat to obtain a replacement tag at a cost set by the city manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination/license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination/license tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-7. - Special permits. 
(a)  Except in areas zoned for agriculture, each premises where there are four or more dogs over the age of four months kept, maintained or harbored for a period of 14 days or longer, shall be deemed to constitute a kennel. The owner or person in possession of the premises where the kennel is located shall be required to apply to the city's designated animal control for a special permit. Other permits as may be required by any law, ordinance, or regulation of the city must also be obtained before operating a kennel. 
(b)  A special permit will be issued upon payment of an annual fee set by the city manager and proof that the premises and dogs covered by the special permit meet the requirements set out in this chapter. 
(c)  The special permit will be valid for one year from the date of issue, provided it is not revoked during the year for violations of this chapter. Application to renew a special permit must be made at least 14 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(d)  Individual license tags will be issued for each dog located in such a kennel, and a separate tag fee over and above the annual special permit fee will not be required. 
(e)  All commercial kennels which are subject to a business license fee shall be exempt from the annual special permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-8. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, improperly use, deprive of shade and shelter, or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill, or abuse any animal. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any animal on any property, public or private, or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open bed truck except when safely confined in a portable kennel or safely restrained by a harness or tether. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 6-9. - Running at large. 
(a)  Generally. Within the territorial boundaries of the city, the running at large of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, dangerous, or potentially dangerous dogs is prohibited, with the exception of cats. Owners of wildlife or exotic animals must have the necessary state and/or federal permits on their person when transporting their animals. 
(b)  Dogs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog to allow or permit such dog to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog unless such dog is securely under leash; said leash being not more than six feet long, and under the control of a competent person. Dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog and shall be restrained by means of a fence or wall or other enclosure, or restrained individually by a leash or chain. Excluded are those dogs participating in or training for obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking work, or law enforcement. Also, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply in any area zoned for agriculture where the owner or person having custody of the dog is, at the time in question, using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his person a valid hunting license and proof of vaccination. 
(2)  An electronic confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when the equipment is properly maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the system perimeters. 
(3)  In cases where an animal has been deemed dangerous by the court, or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary enclosure. 
(4)  Individuals who contain an animal by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found to be in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal shall thereafter restrain the animal by means of a fence, wall or other enclosure, or such animal shall be restrained individually by a leash or chain. 
(c)  Restraint of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife and exotic animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any domestic animal, livestock, wildlife, or exotic animal, to allow or permit such animal to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such unless securely under leash, in a carrying case, or restrained by some other means and under the control of a competent person, with the exception of cats. 
(d)  Confinement of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. Domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs shall be securely confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such by means set forth under the provisions of this chapter, or approved by the health department or its designee and/or as required by state or federal regulations, with the exception of cats. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-10. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use, or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises are not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "warning, guard dog on duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person, to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies. The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by section 6-6(c). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the city to notify the animal control of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the city. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the city shall furnish the following information to the animal control office: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located. 
(2)  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the city except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin will be adequately ventilated. 
(e)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate objects such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(f)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 10, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-11. - Confinement of female dogs in heat. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian, or harborer of any female dog in heat within the areas designated in section 6-6(a), when she is left unattended, to confine such dog securely so as to prevent contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 11, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-12. - Skunks and foxes. 
(a)  All skunks, except pen-raised skunks, and all foxes from whatever geographic region including Alaska and Canada are forbidden to be purchased, sold, owned, possessed, or harbored. Pen-raised skunks and foxes in possession as of July 1, 1987, are grandfathered. 
(b)  Pen-raised skunks, other than black and white skunks, may be purchased and kept as pets after securing a permit from animal control. The animal control is responsible for ensuring that purchasers of pen raised skunks are made knowledgeable of the proper care, handling, and confinement. No pet store shall allow the purchase of pen-raised skunks without being first presented with the permit issued by the animal control. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 12, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-13. - Wildlife or exotic animal. 
Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 13, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-14. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any vicious animal shall be deemed a nuisance. A vicious dog will be exempt as a nuisance upon classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as prescribed in section 6-62. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animal or livestock except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosure used by any domestic animal or livestock shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health department officer or his designee. 
(2)  A domestic animal or livestock shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public or commercial horse facilities): 

 
(3)  Except in an area zoned for agriculture, each domestic animal or livestock shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities): 

 
(4)  Except in the areas zoned for agriculture, the maximum number of domestic animals or livestock that may be kept on any single premises shall not exceed the following (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors, and public and commercial horse facilities): 

 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 14, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-15. - Animals as prizes. 
It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or gift any animal in any contest, raffle, or lottery, or as an enticement for fundraising or for entry into any place of business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 1, § 15, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 6-16—6-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-34. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age, kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of the city is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the city from outside the city to have such dog or cat vaccinated within 14 days from the date of entry, provided that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health department through its designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination, as prescribed by this article, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of the current vaccination. 
(c)  Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his practice, on the request of any owner of a dog, cat, or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat, or other animal against rabies, with a vaccine as set forth in the definition of the term "vaccinate" in section 6-2, provided that, at the time of vaccination, he furnishes two copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwards one copy to the animal control, and maintains one copy for his files. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 6-35. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal, or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately report such animal to the health department or its designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the health department or its designee. The animal control office, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain a record of its rabies related activities, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals in the manner and frequency stipulated by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-36. - Quarantine. 
(a)  In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital, or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  In the event a warm-blooded animal other than a dog or cat has bitten a human or other warm-blooded animal, or in the event a warm-blooded animal has been bitten by another warm-blooded animal, the recommendations contained in the rabies control manual compiled by the state department of public health shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian, or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat, or other animal which has bitten a human, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. Such animal will be placed under quarantine or submitted for laboratory examination at the discretion of the health department or its designee. The provisions of this article shall apply, regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)  When rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate a geographical area within which quarantine of all owned warm-blooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the health department or its designee, whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No warm-blooded animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health department or its designee. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the health department or its designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large, may be posted by the health department or its designee with signs which read as follows: "Rabies suspected" or "Rabies—keep away from animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health department or its designee and shall not be removed except by the health department or its designee. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the health department or its designee under the terms of this article shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animal subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the health department or its designee deems necessary. 
(j)  Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies, as determined by the health department or its designee, shall be immediately destroyed; and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the epidemiology office, department of human resources, for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-61. - Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be vicious, dangerous, or potentially dangerous shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or anyone having any such animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d) through (f) of this section and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, a secure top attached to all sides, the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by leash not more than six feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e., "beware of dog") shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)  Failure to keep any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-62. - Notice to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog owners. 
(a)  When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control hearing board; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control hearing board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(b)  When an animal control hearing board, either created by resolution of the city and subject to the procedural requirements of chapter 2 or utilized pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with another local government sharing a geographical boundary with the city, including Fulton County, receives a request for a hearing, as provided in this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The hearing board will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the hearing board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the hearing board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control hearing board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)  A certificate of registration to the effect that the dog owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the animal control officer, and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  An enclosure as prescribed in section 6-61(b) and (c) for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; 
(2)  The proper posting of the premises as prescribed in section 6-61(g); and 
(3)  An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to dogs classified as dangerous, only. 
(e)  An annual fee will be charged in addition to regular dog-licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council, and may be amended from time to time. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the animal control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in section 6-61 are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If sold or donated to another resident of the city, the new owner has ten days after taking possession of the dog to register the dog with the animal control designated by the city. If the owner moves with the dog from one jurisdiction to another within the state, the owner shall register the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 6-63—6-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION 

Sec. 6-83. - Impoundment of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals. 
(a)  Any citizen may pick up and impound any animal running at large in the city, provided said animal is promptly surrendered to the animal control designated by the city to allow the person having the right of possession an opportunity to reclaim their animal. 
(b)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded from the areas noted in section 6-6(a): 
(1)  Dogs or cats without a current rabies vaccination. 
(2)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination/license tag. This shall include dogs wearing a tag that was not issued for said dog. 
(3)  Warm-blooded animals that have bitten a human or another warm-blooded animal and warm-blooded animals which have been bitten by another warm-blooded animal suspected of having rabies. 
(4)  Warm-blooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Unconfined, warm-blooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(6)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in immediate danger. 
(7)  Animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(8)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, or exotic animals roaming at large, with the exception of cats. 
(9)  Vicious animals or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in section 6-61. 
(10)  Commercial guard/security dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in section 6-10. 
(11)  Dogs in heat not properly confined as defined in section 6-11. 
(c)  No animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by virtue of a vaccination, tag, or certificate. 
(d)  Any animal control officer empowered to perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal which the officer is in immediate pursuit of with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the animal control officer to enter the premises, the officer may remove said dog or other animal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his duties, or for any person to remove any animal from the animal control vehicle or animal control shelter without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(f)  When the owner of the dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article, can be readily identified and located, the health department or its designee shall notify the owner of the impoundment. A reasonable attempt to contact the owner shall be satisfied by a telephone call to the owner's residence, when possible, or a postcard sent to the owner's residence through the U.S. Postal Service. 
(g)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded by any animal control officer, or by a law enforcement officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the dangerous dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by section 6-62(d); 
(2)  The dangerous dog is not validly registered as required by section 6-62(d); or 
(3)  The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as specified in section 6-61(b) or (c). 
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 4, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-84. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Every animal impounded under the provisions of this article which is found upon arrival at the animal control shelter to be diseased or injured, and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, shall, at the discretion of the health department or its designee, be immediately destroyed if not accepted by an organization approved by the health department or its designee, and provided such organization signs a receipt for the animal. In the event an owner cannot be contacted and the severity of the injury or disease of the animal dictates that euthanasia is a humane course of action, the animal will be destroyed and the owner, if known, notified as soon as possible. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the health department or its designee, the release of an impounded animal will impair the safety of the public, such animal will be held pending a court order disposition. 
(c)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be held a minimum of three days from the day of impoundment or such longer period of time as deemed reasonable by the director of animal control. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the animal control shelter for such period of time as the health department or its designee may deem necessary to protect the public health. Exception: Livestock shall be held a minimum of 14 days. 
(d)  Impounded animals not claimed within three days of the day of impoundment or at the end of the quarantine period shall be disposed of (euthanized) in a humane manner as approved by the health department or its designee. No animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of live animal experimentation. 
(e)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this article. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog or cat in an area covered by this article. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(f)  The city manager shall establish reasonable vaccination, license, impoundment, and boarding fees. In some instances the amount of impoundment and boarding fees will be on a cost-incurred basis. 
(g)  Proceeds from license, impoundment, and boarding fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of the animal control for animal and rabies control, enforcement activity, and operation of the animal facility. 
(h)  The health department or its designee shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which it deals but shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 4, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 6-85. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  The animal control shall cooperate with the Atlanta Humane Society and any other approved organization by offering for adoption or placement cats and/or dogs not claimed by the person having the right of possession or any cat and/or dog that may be designated as a stray. 
(b)  Organizations with a continuing interest in adopting animals from the animal control shelter must register with the animal control on the forms provided and be designated as an approved adoption organization. 
(c)  All animals housed at the animal control shelter shall be under the authority of the animal control director or his designee. No animal will be released for adoption or placement prior to the holding period required by section 6-84(c) and with the written approval of the animal control director or his designee. 
(d)  The animal control director may confer ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the animal control shelter to an approved organization, subject to conditions prescribed by the animal control director, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs shall be the responsibility of the receiving organization; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other diseases administered; and 
(3)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(e)  The Atlanta Humane Society will have the right of first refusal on adoptable animals at the animal control shelter. Other approved organizations interested in the adoption of a cat and/or dog may call the animal control shelter on Monday and Thursday morning to question the availability of adoptable animals. The animal control director may also contact an approved organization if an animal is available for adoption. No animal shall be held more than 24 hours past the time of notification. 
(f)  The county health department or its designee shall be held harmless and free from liability for any animal adopted to or placed with an approved adoption organization. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-05, art. 4, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  International Fire Code. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Residential Code. 
(b)  The following permissive codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code. 
(c)  The city also adopts the state minimum standards codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 1, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 1, § 1, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 1, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 1, § 1, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-2. - Maintenance of proper sanitary conditions on premises required; procedures; enforcement. 
(a)  Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, holding, or occupying property in the city shall, at all times, maintain the property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all weeds cut, wastepaper, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of the property. Said duty to maintain property in a clean and sanitary condition shall include the duty to cut and remove undergrowth, such as kudzu, briars, weeds in excess of 24 inches in height, honeysuckle, other vines and seedlings, whenever such undergrowth becomes a nuisance to persons residing in the area or operating businesses in the area. If such undergrowth exists upon an unimproved lot, the planning and zoning director may reduce the extent to which the property must be maintained in such condition, provided there are no imminent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the community development director or a designee thereof to give five days' written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and take reasonable steps to deliver in person to any owner of property or other person violating this section to appear before the city council to show cause why these provisions have not been complied with. In addition, the community development director or a designee shall immediately post a notification upon the property in violation of this section in order to provide visual notification to property owners for a period of five consecutive days. 
(1)  In lieu of inability to contact owners in other manners prescribed above, posted notice shall serve as the official notice for the city council hearing on this matter. 
(2)  After a hearing, if it is deemed by the council that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person shall be given five days to comply and if he fails or refuses to do so, the public works director shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(3)  For purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, as provided for herein, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon, unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property that owner shall be responsible for said violation. 
(4)  The council may, by majority vote, refer any and all cases described in this section to the municipal court, and all hearings heretofore described as being before the council may be before the municipal court if the council decides. 
(c)  When the public works director has caused weeds to be cut from any premises, or wastepaper, trash, or other rubbish removed, a notice shall be prepared assessing the cost of the cutting of those weeds, cleaning and rendering sanitary such vacant lot or other property against the owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, occupying, or controlling the property. The cost of such action shall be a debtor lien upon the property so cleaned and rendered sanitary and a debt against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. The debtor lien shall date from the completion of the work on the property as declared under city council ordinance. 
(d)  A written statement shall be furnished by the city clerk to the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment provided for herein showing the amount of the assessment. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment to pay the city within 30 days after the receipt of the statement the entire amount of the assessment against the property and the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. 
(e)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of property subject to assessment as provided herein who fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of such assessment at the expiration of 30 days after the service of the notice of statement provided above, the city clerk shall issue an execution bearing the date of its issuance in the name of the mayor of the city and specifying the purpose for which it is issued against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property subject to the assessment and also against the property of the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property upon which the work in question is performed. The execution shall assert and be a lien against the property from the day of the completion of the performance of the work hereinbefore described and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date on which it is issued. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(f)  The execution issued under these provisions shall be delivered to the chief of police or a designee thereof who shall execute the same by levying upon and selling the property described therein or so much thereof as may be necessary for the amount due the city from the doing of such work, together with all costs that may accrue thereon. The law applicable to the sales under other executions issued by this city shall apply to the levy, notice, advertisement and sale made under the execution, and the levying officer shall have authority to execute a deed to the purchaser when the property is sold and shall deliver the possession thereof to the purchaser within the time required by law as under tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 4, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 4, § 1, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 4, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 4, § 1, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-3. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city for purposes of the building code shall be the same as is provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 4, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 4, § 2, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 4, § 2, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 4, § 2, 3-3-2015) 
Secs. 8-4—8-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT OF ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 8-27. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 1, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 1, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-28. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 2, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 2, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 2, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-29. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  One- and two-family dwellings. In addition to those codes referenced herein, the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the building, mechanical, and gas systems in new one-and two-family dwellings, including additions, alterations, renovations and general repairs of existing one- and two-family dwellings 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Any appendices referenced in this chapter shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 3, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 3, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 3, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-30. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 4, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 4, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 4, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 4, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-31. - Building department. 
(a)  Creation of building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the department may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the construction board of adjustment and appeal, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 5, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 5, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 5, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-32. - Building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 6, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 6, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 6, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-33. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless, before then, a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m^ 2) or more in area. 
b.  For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents; plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When an application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing an application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
2.  Slab inspection. To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
3.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
4.  Moisture barrier inspection. To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
5.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Required tests. See section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection. To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building, which in the opinion of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 7, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 7, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 7, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-34. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 8, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 8, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 8, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-35. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. The council shall establish a board to be called the "construction board of appeals." Members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  The board shall be comprised of not less than three and not more than five persons. Each member shall serve a term of four years and may serve consecutive terms. 
(2)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(3)  Secretary of the board. The building official shall appoint a secretary for the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(4)  As provided in section 2-77, the council shall establish qualifications for board members. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. in addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The construction board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 9, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 9, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 9, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 9, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-36. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 10, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 10, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 10, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 10, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 8-37. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 2, § 11, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 2, § 11, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 14-01-117, art. 2, § 11, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 15-03-134, art. 2, § 11, 3-3-2015) 
Secs. 8-38—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRENCHING 

Sec. 8-51. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as results of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing, or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-52. - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in the compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 2, 4-1-2008;Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 2, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-53. - Adoption of federal regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly Part 1926, Sub part P-Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring, Section 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 3, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-54. - Certificate required. 
(a)  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)  In the event any person who holds a valid certificate from the city is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reinstalled one time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 4, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-55. - Permit pequired. 
(a)  No excavation or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
(b)  No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 5, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 5, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-56. - Inspection. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards herein above adopted. The inspectors may operate pursuant to a contract between the city and a third-party entity. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 6, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 6, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-57. - Violations. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards herein above adopted. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 7, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 7, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-58. - Appeals. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 3, § 8, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 3, § 8, 9-1-2009) 
Secs. 8-59—8-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. 

Sec. 8-71. - Maintenance of proper sanitary conditions on premises required; procedures; enforcement. 
(a)  Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, holding, or occupying property in the city shall, at all times, maintain the property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all weeds cut, wastepaper, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of the property. Said duty to maintain property in a clean and sanitary condition shall include the duty to cut and remove undergrowth, such as kudzu, briars, weeds in excess of 24 inches in height, honeysuckle, other vines and seedlings, whenever such undergrowth becomes a nuisance to persons residing in the area or operating businesses in the area. If such undergrowth exists upon an unimproved lot, the planning and zoning director may reduce the extent to which the property must be maintained in such condition, provided there are no imminent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the community development director or a designee thereof to give five days' written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and take reasonable steps to deliver in person to any owner of property or other person violating this section to appear before the city council to show cause why these provisions have not been complied with. In addition, the community development director or a designee shall immediately post a notification upon the property in violation of this section in order to provide visual notification to property owners for a period of five consecutive days. 
(1)  In lieu of inability to contact owners in other manners prescribed above, posted notice shall serve as the official notice for the city council hearing on this matter. 
(2)  After a hearing, if it is deemed by the council that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person shall be given five days to comply and if he/she fails or refuses to do so, the public works director shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(3)  For purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, as provided for herein, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon, unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property that owner shall be responsible for said violation. 
(4)  The council may, by majority vote, refer any and all cases described in this section to the municipal court, and all hearings heretofore described as being before the council may be before the municipal court if the council decides. 
(c)  When the public works director has caused weeds to be cut from any premises, or wastepaper, trash, or other rubbish removed, a notice shall be prepared assessing the cost of the cutting of those weeds, cleaning and rendering sanitary such vacant lot or other property against the owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, occupying, or controlling the property. The cost of such action shall be a debtor lien upon the property so cleaned and rendered sanitary and a debt against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. The debtor lien shall date from the completion of the work on the property as declared under city council ordinance. 
(d)  A written statement shall be furnished by the city clerk to the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment provided for herein showing the amount of the assessment. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment to pay the city within 30 days after the receipt of the statement the entire amount of the assessment against the property and the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. 
(e)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of property subject to assessment as provided herein who fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of such assessment at the expiration of 30 days after the service of the notice of statement provided above, the city clerk shall issue an execution bearing date of its issuance in the name of the mayor of the city and specifying the purpose for which it is issued against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property subject to the assessment and also against the property of the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property upon which the work in question is performed. The execution shall assert and be a lien against the property from the day of the completion of the performance of the work hereinbefore described and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date on which it is issued. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(f)  The execution issued under these provisions shall be delivered to the chief of police or a designee thereof who shall execute the same by levying upon and selling the property described therein or so much thereof as may be necessary for the amount due the city from the doing of such work, together with all costs that may accrue thereon. The law applicable to the sales under other executions issued by this city shall apply to the levy, notice, advertisement and sale made under the execution, and the levying officer shall have authority to execute a deed to the purchaser when the property is sold and shall deliver the possession thereof to the purchaser within the time required by law as under tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 4, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 4, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-72. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city for purposes of the building code shall be the same as is provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 4, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 4, § 2, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 8-73. - Overcrowding prohibited. 
(a)  Bedroom requirements. 
(1)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(2)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(b)  Overcrowding specifications. 
(1)  Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 4.5 as follows: 
Table 4.5 

 
Note a. See paragraph 2. of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
Note b. See paragraph 1. of this section for limitations on determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
1.  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table 4.5 shall not be included as sleeping area in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 8-73(a). 
2.  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 4.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency dwelling unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet. An efficiency unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsection (b). 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants shall be three. 
(Ord. No. 08-04-31, art. 4, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-09-56, art. 4, § 3, 9-1-2009) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to impose the taxes set forth in this article upon all businesses and practitioners operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner or taxes and fees shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such taxes and fees shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 15, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without being limited to the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts: 
c.  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city manager or his designee that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances and it may be revoked by the mayor and city council at any time. This definition applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupational tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
Practitioner of professions and occupants shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees. 
(1)  The term "regulatory fees" means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its municipal power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. 
(2)  The term "regulatory fees" does not include: 
a.  Administrative or registration fees; or 
b.  Required occupation taxes for businesses and professions located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 10-21. - Business license required. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, or corporations, including limited liability companies and professional corporations, now or hereafter operating a business in the city, are hereby required to register their business or office, obtain an occupation tax certificate for their business or office, and pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees thereon as authorized under the provisions of chapter 13 of title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, as amended by Ga. L. 1993, p. 1292. 
(b)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established in this chapter. 
(c)  Stock or manufacturing companies or other companies, subsidiaries, agencies, district offices, branch offices, corporations or individuals, having either their business proper or their general branch offices located within the city, and either represented by the officers of the company, or any agent, for the purpose of soliciting patronage for the same, or for the transaction of any business pertaining thereto, shall be required to obtain an occupation tax certificate. 
(d)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees shall be required to file an application in each ensuing year. The applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the issuance of licenses as if no previous licenses had been held. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 10-22. - Fee; basis. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, every business and practitioner subject to this article shall pay a tax based on the gross receipts of such business (the "occupation tax"). 
(b)  The gross receipts fee schedule (see Exhibit A, Fee Schedule) shall be followed in the calculation of the occupational tax. The fees shall be based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code of the business. 
(c)  Home based business (limit of two nonresident employees or six employees total) may pay a flat rate fee (see Exhibit A-Fee Schedule). 
(d)  Businesses not generating gross receipts at the business location in the city, such as but not limited to call centers and warranty service centers, shall pay a rate based on the number of employees performing work at the business location in the city (see Exhibit A, Fee Schedule). The number of employees shall be computed on a full-time position basis and a full-time position equivalent basis. For the purpose of the calculation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(e)  The fees described in this section are adopted for the calendar year 2007 and shall continue in full force and effect until modified by action of the mayor and city council. 
(f)  All businesses and occupations, other than those practitioners listed in section 10-28, shall be assessed a nonrefundable administrative fee for handling and processing business occupation tax registrations, which is a component of the occupation tax for new and existing businesses and is separately identified in the registration process. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 17-01-163 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, Fee schedule as referenced above has not been set out, but may be inspected at the city office. 
Sec. 10-23. - Application for registration. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person, firm or corporation subject to this article, to file with the city on or before March 31 of each calendar year an application for registration under this article setting forth all activities of each business, its NAICS code and/or its revenue code, its estimated gross receipts (or per employee tax if applicable) for the calendar year of the registration, computation of the amount of tax due including the administrative fee and per employee tax, a copy of the profit and loss statement, a copy of its state income tax return, and such other information as may be required by the city to properly administer this article, including the information specified in section 10-25. For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, including businesses or practitioners listed under and subject to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq., the entire gross receipts shall be classified according to the dominant service or product based upon the information provided under this subsection. 
(b)  Each business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, including businesses or practitioners with one or more location or office in the state and one or more location outside the state, the city shall allocate the gross receipts as follows for occupation tax purposes in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, the city shall tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the state. 
(2)  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(3)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed 100 percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(4)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the city as to the allocation under this section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(5)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
a.  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
b.  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
c.  When the city levies an occupation tax on a business or practitioner which has locations encompassed by other jurisdictions and the other jurisdictions use different criteria for taxation, the city shall not tax any greater proportion of the gross receipts than authorized by the law. 
d.  For each business and practitioner with no location or office within the state, but which: 
1.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
2.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the city, gross receipts of such business or practitioner for purposes of this section shall include only those gross receipts reasonably attributable to sales or services in the state. If such business or practitioner provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this article. 
(c)  Real estate brokers transacting business within the corporate boundaries of the city are subject to this article. Real estate brokers shall be liable for tax only on gross receipts arising from transactions involving real estate located within the corporate boundaries of the city. Real estate brokers shall be liable for such taxes without regard to their having a location or office in the city. 
(d)  The provisions of this section may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the mayor and city council for the purpose of providing for exceptions to business and occupation taxes as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f). 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Code 1981, § 4843-14, enacted by Ga. L. 1993, p. 1292, § 7; Ga. L. 1995, p. 419, § 1; Ga. L. 1999, o. 749, § 5. 
Sec. 10-24. - Payment of fee; separate locations; refunds. 
(a)  Following the filing of the application as provided for in section 10-23, each business or professional practitioner subject to this code shall remit payment in full for all taxes and fees due not later than March 31 of the year in which the application is filed. Each person, firm or corporation operating under various trade names must secure a separate occupation tax certificate for each trade name issued. In addition, a separate occupation tax certificate must be secured for each business location. 
(b)  Certificate applicants for trade names and for separate business locations shall pay the nonrefundable administrative fee imposed hereby, in addition to the tax imposed by section 10-22. In the event a business ceases to operate after the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, no refund of the fee or tax shall be granted. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the refund of the occupation tax levied herein is governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
Sec. 10-25. - Inspection of records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all businesses subject to the tax and administrative fee imposed by section 10-22, with the exception of those businesses and practitioners electing to proceed under section 10-28, to maintain and to provide as a part of their business occupation tax registration such records as will establish gross receipts as herein defined, including but not limited to, profit and loss statements prepared on a calendar year basis, and method of allocation of revenue for businesses and practitioners maintaining locations in other counties and municipalities, if applicable. Such businesses and practitioners shall also make available for inspection by representatives of the city all reports submitted to the sales tax unit of the state department of revenue showing sales taking place in the state and other tax returns showing gross receipts. 
(b)  Lending institutions and any other organization engaged in the lending of money at interest and/or for a fee or commission and otherwise subject to the requirements of this article shall provide, for each lending transaction, a loan term sheet or other summary showing the amount of such loan, the interest rate thereon, and total fees, interest and/or commissions to be charged on such loan, assuming payment in the normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-26. - Termination of business. 
It shall be the duty of each business and practitioner subject to fees and occupation taxes under this article when it shall cease to do business or practice to return its current occupation tax certificate, together with a statement as to the date of termination of doing business or practice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-27. - Commencement of business after January 1. 
Businesses and practitioners which do not commence operation by January 1 of any year shall pay the amount of administrative fees and occupation taxes set forth in this article based on anticipated revenue for the balance of the calendar year as provided in section 10-23. Such payments shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-28. - Professional occupation tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, there is hereby imposed upon practitioners of law, medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry dentistry, optometry, applied psychology, veterinary, landscape architecture, land surveying, massage therapy and physiotherapy, public accounting, embalming, funeral directing, civil, mechanical, hydraulic and electrical engineering, architecture, marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors, as their entire occupation tax, one of the following, at the practitioner's election: 
(1)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The practitioner shall elect to pay a flat fee for each year for the year 2007 and subsequent years, but a practitioner paying according to this shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of such practitioner. For the purposes of this section, the term "practitioner" includes any individual holding license to practice any of the professions specified herein regardless of whether such individual shall practice as a professional corporation or professional association. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-29. - Transfer, suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Transfer. No certificate issued hereunder may be transferred. Any new business or practitioner shall apply and register for a new certificate within 30 days after the commencement of business. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  Each certificate granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any current or future rule or regulation of this Code, the Code of Ordinances for Fulton County, or state or federal law. 
(2)  Notice. 
a.  Whenever, in the opinion of the city manager, there is cause to suspend or revoke this certificate, a written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the certificate shall be furnished to the holder thereof. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the certificate holder may present his case before the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. 
b.  After the hearing, the mayor and city council or its designate may suspend or revoke this certificate if the grounds set forth below in subsection (b)(2)c of this section exist or, in the mayor and city council's discretion, if the establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
c.  The decision to suspend or revoke a certificate issued under this article shall be solely within the discretion of the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. An occupation tax certificate may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds, but is not limited to: 
1.  The certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the business or occupation he practices, or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
2.  The certificate holder is engaged in his business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
3.  The certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his duties; 
4.  The certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
5.  The certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in title 16, chapter 6 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant is found not to be of good moral character, or pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
6.  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
7.  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
8.  Any other violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 10, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-30. - Payment; penalty for late payment; issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers. 
(a)  Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder, shall be due and payable by March 31 of each calendar year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January 1, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 10-27. The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for: 
(1)  Failure to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees when due; 
(2)  Failure to file an application by March 31 of any calendar year, when the business or practitioner was in operation the preceding calendar year; and/or 
(3)  Failure to register and obtain an occupation tax certificate within 30 days of the commencement of business. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. Payments required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person, firm or corporation liable for the payment. Executions shall be levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city, or city's designee, as ex-officio sheriff of the county. In addition, any person whose duty it is to register any business or practice and obtain any occupation tax certificate and fails to do so, or who fails to pay the occupation tax or administrative fee required by this article, or who makes any deliberate or substantial and material false statement on an application or provides materially false information in support of an application, shall be denied an occupation tax certificate, shall be required to surrender any existing such occupation tax certificate and be deemed to have no such occupation tax certificate for purposes hereof, and shall be subject to a civil fine according to the maximum amount allowable under state law. 
(c)  No business and/or practitioner subject to this article shall collect any gross receipts as defined herein unless such business and/or practitioner shall have applied for a business tax certificate and/or license as required hereunder. Upon application for a business tax certificate, any such business and/or practitioner may thereupon collect gross receipts, including those incurred but not collected during the period prior to the application, but such business and/or practitioner shall be subject to the penalties of subsection (a) of this section. If the taxes and fees remain unpaid after the due date, the business and/or practitioner shall not collect any gross receipts as defined herein. The provisions of this subsection (c) may be enforced by appropriate injunctive or other relief upon the application of the city to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(d)  Practitioners of law may collect gross receipts as defined herein without applying for and obtaining a business tax certificate. However, practitioners of law must pay the occupation tax levied herein. Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder, shall be due and payable by March 31 of each calendar year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January 1, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 10-27. Upon 90 days' delinquency, the city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for failure to pay the occupation tax required by the Article herein that may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person, firm or corporation liable for the payment. Executions shall be levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city or its designee, as ex-officio sheriff of the county. In addition, failure to pay the occupation tax required by this article shall subject the person, firm, or corporation to a civil fine of $500.00 as provided by law of this state. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 11, 12-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty for late payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; Sexton v. Johnson, 267 Ga. 571 (1997). 
Sec. 10-31. - Proration of fee. 
License fees for new applications for a home based business shall be prorated if the business will be in operation for less than six months during the year of application. All businesses that will begin operations on or after July 1 shall pay one-half (50 percent) of the license fee for the year of application. No other license fee shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 13, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 17-01-163 , § 2, 1-10-2017) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 10-32. - Repealer, exceptions. 
All ordinances providing for occupation taxes and administrative fees in conflict with this article are hereby repealed; provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect any ordinance providing for regulation of taxicabs or shall affect any resolution providing for the regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages and taxes imposed thereon, or any mixed drink tax or any hotel-motel tax, such taxes being due and payable in addition to the taxes and fees imposed hereby. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 1, § 14, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-33—10-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FEES ON INSURERS 

Sec. 10-53. - Intent. 
The mayor and city council hereby expresses its intent to impose license fees on insurers conducting business in the city, to impose a gross premium tax on insurers operating within the state, to provide an effective date, and for other purposes related to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums. 
(1)  The term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, which provides that all foreign, alien, and domestic insurance companies doing business in this state shall pay a tax of 2¼ percent upon the gross direct premiums received by them on and after July 1, 1955. The tax shall be levied upon persons, property, or risks in the state, from January 1 to December 31, both inclusive, of each year without regard to business ceded to or assumed from other companies. The tax shall be imposed upon gross premiums received from direct writings without any deductions allowed for premium abatements of any kind or character or for reinsurance or for cash surrender values paid, or for losses or expenses of any kind; provided, however, deductions shall be allowed for premiums returned on change of rate or canceled policies; provided, further, that deductions may be permitted for return premiums or assessments, including all policy dividends, refunds, or other similar returns paid or credited to policyholders and not reapplied as premium for additional or extended life insurance. The term "gross direct premiums" shall not include annuity considerations. 
(2)  For purposes of this chapter, annuity considerations received by nonprofit corporations licensed to do business in this state issuing annuities to fund retirement benefits for teachers and staff personnel of private secondary schools and colleges and universities shall not be considered gross direct premium. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-55. - Insurers license fees. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1), there is hereby levied for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee, based upon a Chattahoochee Hills population, of $40.00 upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10-56, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied an additional $40.00 license fee per location. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-12-44, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 10-56. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2), for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional $14.00 license fee per location for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-12-44, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 10-57. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2008 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-55. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-58. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 2008 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premium received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-55. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-59. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed by sections 10-55 and 10-56 shall be due and payable on January 1 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 2, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-60—10-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWN SHOPS, PAWN BROKERS 

Sec. 10-77. - Applicability of article provisions. 
Every person, whether a licensed junk dealer or pawnbroker, or any other secondhand dealer, who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with other business, purchases, sells or acquires in trade used or secondhand jewelry, flat silver, gold, and silver objects of every kind and description, including watches and clocks, any of which is made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals; diamonds, emeralds, rubies, or other precious stones; pistols or guns; musical instruments, bicycles or accessories shall, for the purpose of this article, be a secondhand dealer. Any person who shall purchase any article of the kinds herein described from any person other than a bona fide dealer in those articles shall, for the purpose of making the reports required herein, also be a secondhand dealer and subject to all the provisions of this article relating to those records and reports. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-78. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Contents of record book. All secondhand dealers shall keep a book wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property of the kinds specified in section 10-77 which they acquire by purchase of trade, and the name, address, estimated age, weight, and height of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of the purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction is had, in no case more than one hour thereafter. 
(b)  Inspection. This record shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-79. - Entries in record book to be numbered serially; property to be tagged with corresponding number. 
Every entry required to be made in the secondhand dealer's book required by section 10-78 shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-80. - Acquiring articles with serial number mutilated or altered. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or acquire in trade any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire, or battery, or any other article commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-81. - Daily reports to police; form and contents. 
Every secondhand dealer identified in section 10-77 shall make a daily report in writing to the chief of police in such form as may be prescribed by him, of all property purchased or acquired by him during the 24 hours ending at 12:00 midnight on the date of the report. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-82. - Examination and inspection of articles by police; segregation of suspicious articles. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the police department. If, upon the inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, he shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of it, or in any manner mutilate, melt, or disfigure it, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-83. - Property not to be disposed of for 15 days after acquisition. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall be held for not less than 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-84. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to buy or receive any property of the kinds described in section 10-77 from any person under the age of 18 years, provided that any secondhand dealer taking from the seller a statement in writing that the seller is of age will not be held subject to the provisions of this section, if the appearance of the seller is such as to make it uncertain that he is not 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 3, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-85—10-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 10-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bank means any financial institution chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock. 
Depository financial institution means a bank or a savings and loan association. 
Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Savings and loan association means any financial institution, other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of any state or under the laws of the United States which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-113. - Tax levied; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 2007 and for each year thereafter an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of one-quarter percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-114. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a) shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-115. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of the gross receipts with the city on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The return shall provide the information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's Georgia gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has an office. The city shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-116. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be paid to the city at the time of filing the return. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-117. - Administrative provisions. 
The city manager's office is hereby authorized and directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution located in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution that does business in the city if located outside the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-118. - Relation of tax to other business licenses. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be in lieu of any other business license upon depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 4, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-119—10-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES 

Sec. 10-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means and includes any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-151. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of soliciting, calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. 
(1)  It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  It does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the solicitor is employed by or represents, a photograph of the solicitor, and physical description. Such photograph shall be provided by the solicitor and shall be at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than six months. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-152. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this chapter, if any; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(14)  Proposed method of operation; 
(15)  Description and license plate number of vehicle intended to be operated by applicant; 
(16)  Signature of applicant; and 
(17)  Social security number of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and a background investigation by the city public safety department in connection with the application for the permit. 
(d)  The city manager shall cause to be kept in his office or designee office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(f)  The fee for a permit shall be valid for a six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-153. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city manager if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. 
(c)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-154. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-155. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation, whether himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
(c)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(d)  Times allowed. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 6:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or on a state or national holiday. 
(2)  Solicitations for political purposes shall not occur prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-156. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum fine allowed by state law for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 5, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-157—10-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 

Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means those entities defined and registered as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-17 et seq. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 6, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-182. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or corporation to solicit within any public right-of-way in the city; provided, however, recognized charitable organizations as defined herein and governmental entities may solicit within the public right-of-way provided they first obtain a permit in accordance with this chapter. Permitted charitable solicitation shall not take place within the public right-of-way between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 6, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-183. - Applicability. 
This chapter regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 6, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-184—10-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PANHANDLING 

Sec. 10-205. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to section 10-152 shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 7, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-206. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor within any public area in Chattahoochee Hills or: 
(1)  In any public transportation vehicle, or public transportation station or stop; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(b)  Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute an ordinance violation. 
(c)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 7, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-207. - Applicability. 
This chapter regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 7, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-208—10-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 10-238. - Intent of article; severability. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of taxicab businesses as set forth in this article upon all businesses operating in the corporate boundaries of the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the regulations and/or fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner or regulation and/or fee shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such regulation and/or fee shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. The invalidity of any part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion hereof. In the event that this article may not be enforced against any class of business mentioned herein, such inability to enforce the same shall not affect its validity against the other business specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 16, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-239. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with article. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab in the city except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-240. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Line jumping. Taxicabs shall be placed on stands only from the rear and shall be moved forward and to the front of the stand immediately as space becomes available by the departure or movement of preceding taxicabs. Violations of this rule constitutes line jumping and shall be grounds for suspension of a taxi drivers permit. 
Operator means any person, firm, or corporation in the business of transporting passengers in taxicabs. 
Ride share driver means an individual who uses his or her personal passenger car to provide transportation for passengers arranged through a ride share network service. 
Ride share network service means any person or entity that uses a digital network or Internet network to connect passengers to ride share drivers for the purpose of prearranged transportation for hire or for donation. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle for hire which conveys passengers between locations of their choice and is a mode of public transportation for a single passenger or small group for a fee. Such term shall also mean taxi or cab, but not a bus or school bus, limousine, passenger car used by a ride share driver, or commercial motor vehicle. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the charge for hire of a vehicle. Taxicabs operating with non-electronic taximeters shall be furnished with a sign, approved by the city code enforcement, immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. This sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 17-01-163 , § 3, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-241. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the city. 
A taxicab shall be deemed to be doing business in the city when its original terminus, that is to say, the place from which it operated and is subject to calls, shall be located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-242. - License fees for annual operation and driver's permit. 
License fees are hereby levied per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and per annum for each driver's permit. The license fees are established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. The business occupation tax shall be in accordance with the current business occupation tax ordinance. The following criteria must be met to maintain a taxi cab license: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of an office within the corporate boundaries of Chattahoochee Hills. 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space. 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly listed telephone number. 
(4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company. 
(5)  Maintain off-street parking capable of accommodating all company vehicles. 
(6)  Maintain a file for each vehicle containing proof of current instruments. 
(7)  Possess a valid six-month auto insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 17-01-163, § 4, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 10-243. - Permits for operation. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a taxicab or conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the person, firm, or corporation has first applied for and obtained an occupation tax certificate and a taxicab license. The applications for the occupation tax certificate and license shall be made to the city upon forms provided for that purpose. The license for vehicles shall be issued by the city. Permits for drivers will be issued by the city police department. 
(2)  No person shall operate a taxicab in the corporate boundaries of the city until the person has first applied for and obtained a driver's permit. Permits for drivers will be issued by the city police department. 
(b)  Description of business. The application shall contain, among other things, a detailed description of the equipment to be used in the business and the name of the operators thereof, the point of original terminus of the business, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Indemnity insurance. No taxicab license to operate taxicabs shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof shall file with the business tax division a policy of indemnity insurance in some indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which policy shall have limits equal to or in excess of the following sums for each taxicab operated: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, $50,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injury to all persons sustained in any one accident, $50,000.00; and 
(3)  For property damage and liability for baggage of passengers, $25,000.00. 
The policy shall be conditioned to protect the public against injury or damage proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of such permit. Additional drivers or new drivers hired after issuance of the occupation tax certificate shall be covered by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of a driver's permit. 
(d)  Ages of vehicles. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business is no more than six years old. By December of each year, automobiles of a model year seven years prior to that year must be replaced. 
(e)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab licenses and taxi drivers' permits are due no later than June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-244. - Certificate of inspection. 
(a)  A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the city and issued by an ASE certified mechanic and shall be located inside the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every 90 days, and the operator of any taxicab business shall be required to keep his taxicab and equipment therein in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his permit to conduct a taxicab business suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Each taxicab must produce proof of taximeter inspection and calibration for issuance and renewal of taxi decal. 
(c)  The city police department may conduct random inspections to ensure the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-245. - Additional equipment. 
The operator of a taxi business shall register with the city each additional piece of equipment put in use, and same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-246. - Drivers' qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of all operators to file with the city the names and addresses, age and physical description of the persons employed as drivers. All drivers shall hold licenses from the state department of public safety as drivers of vehicles for hire, and drivers' permits issued by the county police department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has, within the past five years, been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in title 16, chapter 6 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or to the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or to any open container violations, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, violence, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute or if the driver has been convicted of an offense of causing death by vehicle. No driver can be issued a taxi driver's permit if the driver has received three or more moving violations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-247. - Taxi stands; parking. 
Operators and drivers of taxicabs shall not park taxicabs in any congested area as defined by the regulations of the city council at any place other than the place designated as "taxi stand." The parking of taxicabs shall be subject at all times to the direction of police officers should such direction be necessary or desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-248. - Information to be displayed. 
(a)  Information to be displayed inside the taxicab at all times. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business shall have posted in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of the city, the name and photograph of the driver of the taxicab, and a schedule of fares. Each taxicab used in active business shall also bear on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be furnished by the city. 
(b)  Information to be displayed outside the taxicab at all times. The operator is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be furnished by the city, the name of the company and business telephone number which must be permanently affixed to the taxicab, a dome light on the roof which must be at least six inches in height permanently affixed to the roof and bear the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 10, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-249. - Operators responsible for violations by drivers. 
To the extent provided by law, operators are responsible for violations of this article by their taxicab drivers whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 11, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-250. - Notice of denial of license. 
In the event that an application is denied, the city shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the taxicab license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 12, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-251. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the county now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the city manager determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder, the city manager's office shall give the licensee a ten-day written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the city council or such board as the city council may designate. The ten-day written notice shall include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing will be held. After the hearing, the council or designated board may suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth below exist. A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council or their designee and a driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the city police department upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or permit under this article; 
(4)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period; 
(5)  Refusing to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or sex. Operators and drivers shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(6)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a driver to operate in the city in violation of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The establishment or driver is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(8)  Not taking the most direct route; or 
(9)  For violation of any part of this article. 
(d)  After the city manager makes a recommendation to the mayor and city council to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and city council, or such board as the mayor and city council may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city manager or his designate proceeds first and shall have ten minutes to present all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  The mayor and the city council members or their designates will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(3)  After the city manager makes his presentation, the licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, shall have ten minutes to present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be suspended or revoked. The mayor and city council members or their designate will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(4)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the mayor and city council will render a decision. The suspension or revocation of a taxicab license is final unless the licensee files a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 13, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-252. - No proration of license fee. 
No license fees shall be prorated. Taxi driver's permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(Res. No. 01-0373, § 1, 3-21-2001; Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-253—10-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROFESSIONAL BONDSMEN 

Sec. 10-283. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Professional bondsmen means all persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-284. - Compliance. 
All professional bondsmen licensed through the city must comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 and all related and pertinent sections of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated at all times when acting as bonding agents in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-285. - Surety requirement. 
Prior to the issuance of a license, professional bondsmen shall post a surety or property bond with the city clerk in an amount of at least $50,000.00, and such bond shall be kept current at all times; or the professional bondsman may sign an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in a financial institution designated as a city depository. Any such escrow account shall be not less than $5,000.00, and shall be ten percent of that company's capacity for posting bonds. Upon acceptance of either the surety bond or the escrow account and payment of the administrative fee set forth from time to time by the city council, the city shall issue a business license to the bonding company. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-286. - Nonappearance of principal. 
In the event of the nonappearance of the principal in the municipal court on the appointed date and time, the judge shall, at the end of the court day, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing. Procedures for forfeiture of bonds and judgment absolute set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 17-6-70 through 17-6-72 shall be followed. In addition to the penalties set forth in state law, if the judgment absolute is entered, and payment is not made promptly to the city, the license of the bail bondsman shall be suspended until such time as the judgment absolute is satisfied, or the defendant is returned to the custody of the court. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-287. - Cancellation of bond. 
When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the judge shall make an order canceling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by a bail bondsman. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-288. - Suspension of bail bond license. 
The city may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any bail bondsman's business license for any of the following causes: 
(1)  For any violation of state statutes or city code. 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license. 
(3)  Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under this license. 
(4)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under this license. 
(5)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Failure to return collateral security to the principal who is entitled thereto. 
(7)  Failure to meet the obligations or standards set forth by the state or the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-289. - Return of license. 
Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the city clerk and immediately return his license certificate. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 10-290. - Monthly reporting. 
All bondsmen licensed to do business in the city shall provide the city clerk with a list of all outstanding bonds posted with the city on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-08, art. 8, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 10-291—10-313. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 10-314. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Rationale and findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002): City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000): City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., U.S. 560 (1991): California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and 
Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11 th Cir. 2003): Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 200); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999): This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002): DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); Gammon v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004): Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); and 
Fairfax MKI, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998): World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 214 (1978); and 
Based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas, 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana, 1984; Garden Grove, California, 1991; Houston, Texas, 1983, 1997: Phoenix, Arizona, 1979, 1995—98; Chattanooga, Tennessee, 1999—2003; Los Angeles, California, 1977; Whittier, California, 1978; Spokane, Washington, 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota, 1994; Littleton, Colorado, 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 1986; Dallas, Texas, 1997; Montrose, Illinois, 2005; Kennedale, Texas, 2005; American Planning Association, 2001; Greensboro, North Carolina, 2003; Amarillo, Texas, 1977; New York, New York Times Square, 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota; 
the city council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 1, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-315. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specialized sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A substantial business activity exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the retail value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; 
(5)  The establishment devotes at least 25 percent of its interior business space or, if less than 25 percent, devotes at least 500 square feet of its interior business space, to the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in interior business space); 
(6)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; 
(7)  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using the term "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(8)  Maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or other commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
City means the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia. 
Employ, employee, or employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment means and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; or 
(2)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it means the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. 
Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio. 
(1)  The term "semi-nude model studio" means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
(2)  The term "semi-nude model studio" does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
c.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means any three dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude model studio, a sexual device shop, or a sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified offenses for which less than five years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
b.  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
c.  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
d.  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; or 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 2, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-316. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(4)  Semi-nude model studio; 
(5)  Sexual device shop; 
(6)  Sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 3, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-317. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee of a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the city clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the city clerk. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) of this section and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the city clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 4, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-318. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of any other part of this Code or state law. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within 20 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the city clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 5, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-319. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: $100.00 for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and $50.00 for annual renewal; $50.00 for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and $25.00 for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 6, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-320. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the city clerk and his agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 7, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-321. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 8, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-322. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 9, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-323. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous 12-month period. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 10, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-324. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the city clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city clerk for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the city clerk's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
(1)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his behalf, and cross-examine any of the city clerk's witnesses. The city clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. 
(2)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the tenth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging the decision of the hearing officer is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the city clerk: 
(1)  Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's denial, suspension, or revocation decision, the city clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. 
(2)  The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. 
(3)  The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 11, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-325. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 12, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-326. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 13, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-327. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsection (a)(5)a though e of this section. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access. An operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 14, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-328. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. 
If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lots for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 15, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-329. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
(b)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 16, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-330. - Applicability of ordinance to existing businesses. 
All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. By the end of said 90 days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 17, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-331. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 18, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-332. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 19, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-333. - Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of conditions necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license, including a renewal, the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 20, 2-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-334. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Distance certain locations. It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in the city, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
(1)  1,000 feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually oriented business or by a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises; and 
(2)  1,000 feet from any parcel occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or any residence. 
(b)  Measurement. For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest point on a boundary line of the sexually oriented business parcel to the closest point on a boundary line of any parcel containing a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residence, another sexually oriented business, or a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol on the premises. 
(c)  Preexisting sexually oriented businesses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, a nonconforming sexually oriented business, lawfully existing in all respects under law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may continue to operate for one year following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said one year, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, except that a nonconforming sexually oriented business may obtain an extension of the original one-year period upon a showing of financial hardship. An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be made at least 60 days before the conclusion of the aforementioned one-year period. 
(d)  Procedure for seeking hardship extension. 
(1)  An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, appraised value of the property and/or leasehold interests, and costs of relocation. Within ten days after receiving the application, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing on the application before the hearing officer, which hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the city clerk's receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be provided to the applicant via certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten days after the hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension shall be granted upon a showing of financial hardship. Such a showing shall be established if the hearing officer makes the following findings: 
a.  The applicant has, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, made a substantial investment, including, but not limited to, lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment prior to the conclusion of the one-year period. 
(e)  Extension to be for reasonable time. Any extension granted under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-23, § 21, 2-6-2008) 
Secs. 10-335—10-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - WASTE OF WATER 

Sec. 10-351. - Waste of water prohibitions. 
(a)  The following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water to escape from any premises onto public right-of-way, such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property. 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during rain. 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads which cause an uncontrolled water release. 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within 30 days. 
(5)  Washing any vehicle with a hose and not having a water shut-off nozzle or allowing water to run continuously from a hose while washing any vehicle is also prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-180 , § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 10-352. - Exceptions. 
The restrictions in this article do not apply to the following authorized uses: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities. 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure, as required by erosion and sedimentation rules. 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology. 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available. 
(5)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists. 
(6)  Water used for power-washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, unless prohibited by drought restrictions. 
(7)  Mobile car washes when approval or a special use permit is obtained from the local authority. 
(8)  Emptying of swimming pools for maintenance when proper local regulations are followed. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-180 , § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Compliance with state law. 
All elections and challenges thereto shall be in compliance with the Georgia Election Code codified at O.C.G.A. title 21, chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-2. - General elections. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-3. - Special elections. 
Special elections shall be held as needed according to the city Charter section 2.03 and shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 2, title 21 of O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-4. - Superintendents. 
The city manager shall appoint the municipal superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. The council shall provide for the superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-5. - Conducting elections. 
The city shall coordinate all elections with the county board of elections and registration. The city may contract or otherwise decide by agreement with the county board of elections and registration for that board to coordinate and conduct all elections in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 12-6—12-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 12-29. - Candidate requirements. 
(a)  Residency. In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, candidates for mayor and city council must have been a resident of the city for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election; and each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. In addition, candidates for each of the council districts must have been a resident of such district for a continuous period of at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election for councilmember and continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  Age. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person is at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-30. - Notice of candidacy. 
Filing of notice of candidacy for municipal office shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132 as amended. The qualifying period shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In special elections, the qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-31. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each candidate shall pay a fee of three percent of the total salary of the office sought. Such fee shall be deposited into the city treasury in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(b)  A pauper's affidavit may be filed in lieu of the qualifying fee in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-32. - Withdrawal. 
Any candidate may withdraw his name as a candidate prior to October 15 of the election year. No refund will be made to any candidate for the fee remitted to qualify for office. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 12-33—12-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOTING 

Sec. 12-53. - Electors to be registered by county. 
The city council shall provide for the use of the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in the municipal primary or election. Only residents of a particular council district within the city who are registered as electors with the county shall be eligible to vote in the municipal primary, general or special election for a councilmember of that particular district. Any resident of the city who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote for mayor in the municipal primary, general or special election. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-54. - Absentee ballots. 
Voting by absentee ballots in a method consistent with state law shall be permitted in municipal elections. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 12-55. - Records. 
To the extent required by O.C.G.A., § 21-2-72, voting records and documents shall be made available in accordance with that statute. The maintenance of said records shall be kept in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-73. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-03, art. 4, 12-12-2007) 
Chapter 14 - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENTS RIGHTS 

Sec. 14-19. - Introduction. 
(a)  Ownership of real estate is more than just ownership of a patch of dirt. Ownership comes with a bundle of rights, such as the right to occupy the surface of the land, the right to valuable things (such as oil and minerals) beneath the surface of the land, the right to plant trees and crops, the right to the airspace above the land, and the right to improve the land by adding roads and buildings such as houses and barns, and the right to sell or lease the land. 
(b)  These various rights may be split, or "severed," from the land and sold to others. In the American west, land often does not come with the rights to the minerals beneath it ("mineral rights") or the water that lands on it or flows across it ("water rights"). In a city a building owner may sell the rights to the space above his building ("air rights") to allow a larger building to be constructed above it. Similarly, "development rights" may be severed from undeveloped rural land and transferred to another owner separately from the land. 
(c)  When a development right is severed from the land, a legal document is recorded with the county to protect the property and keep it rural. That legal document is defined in this article. 
(d)  A transferable development right (TDR) can be sold and purchased. The seller can profit by selling this one of the many rights that are a part of his bundle of rights. The seller continues to own the land and can continue to live on it or farm it. The parts of the city from which property owners may sever their development rights and transfer them to other owners is called the "sending area." The city's sending area is defined in this article. 
(e)  When a development right is purchased and applied according to the rules in this article, the new owner receives an increase in development potential on his property, as regulated in chapter 35, zoning. The parts of the city in which a property owner may apply a transferred development right are called "receiving areas." The receiving areas are defined in this article and the rules for applying transferred development rights in the receiving areas are set forth in this article as well as in chapter 35, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  In the comprehensive land use plan for the city, the city established a goal of retaining its rural and natural character. Consequently, the city desires to preserve land which defines the city as rural and natural such as farmland and forests. This article enables a process by which such land is preserved through the transfer of development rights from one property to another to promote the conservation of natural, agricultural, environmental, historical and cultural resources in at least 60 percent of the city while encouraging a denser, walkable, financially-sustainable development pattern in the remaining 40 percent that does develop. The value of the transferred development rights allows non-developing landowners to share in the economic benefits of traditional neighborhood development without encouraging sprawl. 
(b)  The use of transferable development rights (TDR) is an important part of the city's strategy for the preservation of its rural character. The transferring of development rights is a method for permanently conserving and protecting land by increasing the development potential in one area (the receiving area) in return for reducing development potential in another (the sending area). The transfer process should be guided by the characteristics of certain parcels or areas where preservation or development is more or less desired (because of physical or market realities). 
(c)  The TDR program is designed to achieve the following: 
(1)  Increase total open space. The TDR program provides a means of clustering development on a city-wide scale, increasing the amount of open space. 
(2)  Increase contiguous open space. The TDR program permits development to be concentrated on fewer properties, thereby providing more contiguous open space that is better wildlife habitat. 
(3)  Reduce infrastructure. If each property in the city develops, this will maximize the miles of roads and infrastructure that must be maintained and serviced by the city. The increase of density on a property through the purchase of TDRs decreases the length of roads and infrastructure, while keeping the number of units the same. This results in a substantial reduction in the length of roads and infrastructure to be maintained and serviced per dwelling unit, thus decreasing the residents' tax burdens. 
(4)  Preserve scenic resources. Much of the city is currently forested. Roadways that are hemmed in by trees and tree canopy by their nature feel rural. Additionally, land in agriculture or meadow is important to the area's character because these are the only places with views that enable one to see the horizon and have a sense of space. While the nature of any specific undeveloped parcel visible from the road may change over time, the fact of its visibility (or potential visibility) makes it by definition, scenic, even if only in the potential, and therefore worthy of preservation. If development is located on these properties, it destroys the rural character because it is highly visible. TDRs provide a way in which this land may be protected through development by transferring the development potential to more suitable sites through the sale of TDRs. 
(5)  Other preservation goals. The city also has an interest in protecting agricultural activities, improving the connectivity of and access to preserved space, and cultivating outdoor recreational opportunities. 
(d)  The TDR program may be utilized to preserve property in two ways. The standard TDR method is an open market of property owners negotiating transactions. An alternative, called density transfer charge (DTC) is also available to property owners seeking additional density. Property owners utilizing DTCs pay into a city-controlled fund that is utilized to preserve property via the TDR market. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition or later edition. Terms defined in chapter 35, zoning, or chapter 26, subdivisions, shall apply to this article unless otherwise separately defined herein. 
Base area means the net area of a property from which development rights may be severed and sent. 
Conservation easement means a legally binding agreement between a property owner and a governmental body or charitable organization qualified under O.C.G.A. § 44-10-2(2) that restricts the type and amount of development and use that may take place on a property. 
DTC (density transfer charge) means an optional mechanism by which a receiving area property owner may increase density on a parcel by paying a standardized fee to the city. The city then uses the money to protect property by purchasing TDRs according to established priorities. The DTC option provides speed and convenience to property owners and allows the city to protect the properties it considers most important. 
Land trust means a non-profit corporation with its primary mission to preserve land. 
Receiving area means those properties which may receive development rights from a sending area. 
Scenic area means the area on a map adopted by the city council that indicates property with potential scenic value. Protection of this property is more crucial to the fulfillment of the city's goal to remain deliberately rural. 
Sending area means those properties from which development rights may be severed and transferred to a receiving area. 
TDR (transferable development right) means a development right that has been severed from a sending area property according to the rules in this chapter. TDRs can be bought, sold, or exchanged; they can be held for conservation or investment purposes. When they are applied to a receiving area property they can increase the number of density units available to that property, up to the maximum density allowed by zoning. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-22. - Typical processes. 
(a)  The following processes are typical processes for sending area property: 
(1)  The TDR seller (sending area owner) and the TDR buyer (receiving area owner) negotiate the terms of the transaction. 
(2)  Preliminary TDR assessment. 
(3)  Prepare survey and other documents. 
(4)  Final TDR assessment. 
(5)  Prepare and execute conservation easement. 
(6)  Department issues certificate and serial numbers. 
(7)  Prepare deed of transfer, if a buyer is ready. 
(8)  Provide city with attorney's opinion as to the sufficiency of the documents. 
(9)  Record conservation easement. 
(10)  Sign and record deed of transfer. 
(11)  Record the transaction. 
(b)  The following processes are typical processes for receiving area property: 
(1)  Determine TDRs required. 
(2)  Negotiate the terms of the transaction with the TDR sellers (sending area owners) 
(3)  Sign and record deed of transfer. 
(4)  Record the transaction. 
(5)  Assign TDRs to receiving area parcels and record with the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-23. - Sending areas. 
(a)  Allocation of development rights. This section controls how TDRs are allocated to an owner of sending area property. The TDR is distinguished from the right to develop on a property in subsection (b) of this section. The allocation is prioritized to provide the greatest incentive to retain as open space the most desirable scenic properties. Subsection (c) of this section spells out some types of property that are not eligible to sever and send TDRs. Subsection (d) of this section sets the land area of a property that is eligible to sever and send TDRs. Subsection (e) of this section addresses small parcels that have the potential only for minor subdivision or no subdivision, most of which already have homes on them so they have limited open space value. Subsection (f) of this section is the allocation to larger parcels that could become farmettes or hamlets and whose preservation is a higher priority. It also addresses the allocation to the highest priority scenic land and provides an incentive to sell TDRs. Subsection (g) of this section makes clear the number of TDRs to be deducted if the landowner intends to reserve additional sites for future dwellings. 
(b)  TDRs. TDRs are not a right to develop on a property; they are a right to sever and send the development potential to another landowner. The city has a vested interest is seeing transfers occur because protecting some property while providing additional development potential for others not only supports the community's stated goal of remaining rural, it also reduces the burden on the taxpayer of municipal service delivery. Because there is no direct relationship to the right to develop, the TDR comes into existence only when they are severed and a conservation easement protecting the land as perpetual open space is recorded. 
(c)  Eligibility. Landowners or representatives with the authority to transfer fee simple ownership of any parcel in the city (except as noted below) may apply for a transfer of development rights certificate. Parcels not eligible are as follows: 
(1)  Any property zoned as TN, VL, HM, or PC districts; 
(2)  Any parcel from which all development rights have previously been severed, sold or otherwise transferred; 
(3)  Any parcel on which a conservation easement or other permanent deed restriction has been previously granted which effectively removes all development potential; 
(4)  Any parcel fully developed based on its existing zoning, or as otherwise described in this article. 
(d)  Determine the base area. A survey of the land from which a TDR will be sold shall be submitted by the landowner or ultimate purchaser of the TDR. The survey shall identify the total area of the parcel, and subtracting the following from the total area to determine the base area: 
(1)  Road right-of-way. Deduct land in the ultimate right-of-way of any existing public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Water bodies. Deduct land in a water body whose area is in excess of one quarter acre, whether it is all on the property or not. For example, this ensures that land located under the Chattahoochee River does not count. 
(3)  Conservation land. Deduct any land already under a permanent conservation easement or deed restriction that preserves the land as open space. 
(e)  Allocation to three- to 29-acre parcels. Any parcel from three to 29 acres is covered by this section. The TDRs that are available to these small parcels are based on the right to subdivide parcels into a maximum of three lots, with a three-acre minimum lot size. Accordingly, no TDRs are available for parcels that are less than three acres. 
Table 14-23. Allocation of TDRs by Parcel Area and Existing Development Status 

 
(f)  Allocation to properties of 29 or more acres. 
(1)  One of the chief methods of fulfilling the vision in the city's comprehensive plan to "keep it rural" is to permanently protect the land that is currently scenic land or has the potential to become scenic. In order to encourage preservation of scenic property and to balance the total number of TDRs in the city, property without scenic potential is valued at a lower rate than property with scenic potential. 
(2)  A landowner owning more than 29 acres of land intending to sell development rights is given 0.8 development rights for acre of base area owned, plus an additional 0.4 development rights for every acre of land in the mapped scenic area. At the same time, the city will calculate the development rights using the following calculation to calculate TDRs: 
a.  Multiply the acres of base area by 0.8. 
b.  Multiply the acres of scenic area by 0.4. 
c.  Add these figures. 
d.  Subtract three TDRs per home or reserved home site located on the property, or five TDRs if the home or home site is in the mapped scenic area to determine the base number of TDRs. 
e.  The total of this equation is equivalent to the number of TDRs available from the property. 
(g)  Reservation for future home sites. Any additional home sites reserved on the property will reduce the number of TDRs available by three per home site, or five per home site located in the mapped scenic area. 
(h)  Preliminary assessment of available TDRs. 
(1)  Generally. A landowner may seek a preliminary assessment of available TDRs by submitting the following documentation to the city planner: 
a.  A site survey that identifies parcel lines, water bodies, total site area, and base area. 
b.  Documentation of any conservation easements, deed restrictions, or TDRs already conveyed from the property. 
c.  Identification of existing dwellings and reserved dwelling sites. 
(2)  Preliminary assessment. The city planner shall review the documents and applicable thoroughfare plans, and then issue a preliminary assessment which indicates the estimated number of TDRs that may be conveyed from the property, as follows: 
a.  The director shall make a good faith effort to estimate the number of TDRs that may be conveyed from the property based on the materials provided by the landowner. 
b.  The preliminary assessment shall include language that it is not final until final documentation, including a survey and base area calculation sealed by a land surveyor registered in the state, is provided to the city that verifies the information in the preliminary assessment letter. 
c.  The city will work to issue preliminary assessments within one week of the submittal of the information by the landowner. The form of the preliminary assessment is provided below. 

(i)  Final assessment of available TDRs. 
(1)  Generally. A landowner who wants to sell development rights shall apply for a final assessment of available TDRs, as follows: 
a.  A sealed site survey that identifies parcel lines, water bodies, total site area, and base area. 
b.  Metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared within 90 days of the date of application by a licensed surveyor; 
c.  Documentation of any conservation easements, deed restrictions, or TDRs already conveyed from the property, certified complete by an attorney or title agency. 
d.  Written description of the physical characteristics of the property; 
e.  Site plan which illustrates existing or proposed dwellings, historic structures, easements or other encumbrances; and 
f.  The processing fee as adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Calculation of development rights. After the application of a qualifying conservation easement to the property, the department shall assign serial numbers accordingly, and issue a transfer of development rights certificate. Development rights shall be calculated according to subsections (d) through (g) of this section. The final number of TDRs will be calculated by rounding down to the nearest whole number. 
(3)  Final TDR assessment. The city planner shall review the documents and applicable thoroughfare plans, and then issue a final assessment which sets out the number of TDRs that may be conveyed from the property. The form for the final TDR assessment is provided below. 
(j)  Creation of TDRs. After the final TDR assessment is complete and the sending area property owner has executed a conservation easement, the city shall assign serial numbers for each TDR severed on the sending area property and provide a TDR certificate to the applicant. The director shall keep a log of TDR certificates and serial numbers in the city's TDR registry. 
(k)  What to do with TDRs. TDRs are an interest in real property. They may be held as an investment; they also may be sold to or exchanged with any person or entity capable of owning real property. The city may purchase TDRs from property owners in pursuit of its land preservation goals, but it is under no obligation to do so at any time or for any particular price. TDRs are assumed to reach their greatest financial value when applied to a receiving area property to increase its potential development density, as covered in section 14-24 and in chapter 35, zoning. 
(l)  Appeal of calculation. Any landowner or authorized representative aggrieved by a final decision of the department related to the certification of transfer of development rights may appeal such final decision to the planning commission by filing, in writing, setting forth plainly and fully why the calculation is in error. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the department's final decision. 

(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-24. - Receiving of TDRs. 
(a)  A landowner may purchase development rights to increase the development potential on a site, known as the receiving site. The purchase may be made between landowners or from any holder of TDRs not affixed to a receiving site. This section governs the purchase of development rights and the development that can be built with the purchased development rights. 
(b)  Density transfer charge option. TDR receiving site owners shall have the option of gaining bonus density by paying a density transfer charge (DTC) amount in lieu of each TDR that would otherwise be required. See section 4-27. 
(1)  Eligible properties. Receiving areas are those properties intended for mixed-use development; specifically any property in the HM, VL, or TN zoning districts or subdistricts not permanently protected as open space. Additional receiving areas may be designated through the amendment process as set forth in the city's zoning and the procedures and requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-2. 
(2)  Development potential with TDR. When a developer purchases TDRs and applies them according to the process set forth in this article, the development potential of their property is increased by the number of TDRs purchased, up to the maximum density allowed in the district according to the zoning ordinance or the applicable conditions of zoning. One development right permits the development of a single density unit as described in chapter 35. 
(3)  Calculation methods for acquisition of development rights. The following formulas shall be used to compute the number of TDRs that must be utilized to develop a receiving area: 
The total number of proposed density units (as governed by chapter 35) in the receiving area (hamlet, village, or town) minus the total gross acreage of the area to be developed = total number of TDRs to be purchased from the sending areas. 
Example #1. Suppose 3,000 acres in a town are to be developed at four units per acre. Therefore, 3,000 acres x 4 units per acre = 12,000 units to be developed. 12,000 units minus 3,000 acres (based on the baseline density available with the acreage of the receiving area, using a baseline of one unit per acre as shown in Table 35-461) = 9,000 TDRs to be purchased from the sending areas. 
Example #2. Suppose 30,000 square feet of retail uses are proposed to be developed in a receiving area on which no density units remain. According to Table 35-427, one density unit = 1,000 square feet of retail: 30,000/1,000 = 30 TDRs to be purchased from the sending areas. 
(c)  Use of TDRs. TDRs may be used, at the developer's option, to increase the density of a proposed development as follows: 
(1)  Plan to use TDR. The developer shall indicate on the initial preliminary plan submissions their intent to use TDRs to achieve the proposed plan's density. Since the hamlet, village, and town are large-scale developments that can have development build-out periods of 15 to 30 years, the need for TDRs may change in response to future demands that are not anticipated in the initial development proposal. Hamlet, village, and town plans may be modified as provided in this section. The plan shall indicate the units built by right and those to be built with TDRs. 
(2)  Source of TDRs. The developer shall submit proof of ownership of TDRs 
(3)  Application of TDRs. TDRs are applied as follows: 
a.  If the developer owns the TDRs, they are approved for use with the signing of the final plan for the first phase. 
b.  The developer shall submit TDRs with each phase of development in proportion to the number of dwelling units in the total development to be constructed with transferred development rights. 
c.  A fee shall be paid to the city for the administration of the TDR tracking system in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
(4)  Disposition of TDRs. As TDRs are used in the manner provided in subsection (3) of this section, the city shall keep a record of their use. See section 14-25(b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-25. - Administrative process. 
(a)  Recording of transfer of development rights transactions (sending areas). 
(1)  Deed of transfer. 
a.  A deed of transfer shall be required to convey development rights from a sending parcel to a purchaser. The deed shall be valid only if it is signed by the owner or attorney-in-fact of the sending parcel, complies with all legal requirements for the transfer of real estate, contains provisions established by the department and is recorded in the chain of title after the conservation easement is secured against the sending parcel. 
b.  A deed of transfer shall contain a metes and bounds written legal description and a plat prepared by a licensed surveyor, the names and addresses of the grantor and the grantee of the development rights, the serial numbers of the TDRs being conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department and proof of the execution and recordation of a conservation easement on the sending parcel. 
(2)  Conservation easement. To convey the certified development rights on a sending area, a conservation easement between the owner of the sending area and an organization authorized by the laws of the state to accept, hold and administer conservation easements, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1, Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, must be signed and recorded with the city clerk, prior to the deed of transfer. Conservation easements established pursuant to this section may not be released or nullified by any party. 
a.  The department may develop a model conservation easement form and require it be used to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
b.  In addition to the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, each conservation easement shall contain: 
1.  A metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared by a licensed surveyor; 
2.  Prohibitions against the use and development of the sending area property which are inconsistent with open space as defined in chapter 35, zoning; and 
3.  Assurances that prohibition will run with the land and bind the landowner and every successor in interest to include a statement that the easement shall survive any merger of the easement interest and the fee simple interest of the property. 
c.  Nothing in the easement shall be construed to convey to the public a right of access or use of the property and that the owner of the property, his heirs, successors and assignees will retain exclusive right to such access or use subject to the terms of the easement. This should not be interpreted to preclude a grant of public access if the owner of the property chooses to grant it, subject to the terms of the easement. 
d.  Landowners interested in creating TDRs on their property should be careful to begin the process with the city before executing a conservation easement since property protected by conservation easement is not eligible to be a TDR sending area (see section 4.3). 
(3)  Sufficiency of documents. Prior to the recordation of the deed of transfer and the conservation easement, parties to the transaction must obtain an opinion from a licensed Georgia attorney that the deed and easement have been executed by all necessary parties and is perpetual and binding on the property owner and every successor in interest. A copy of this document shall be provided to the city. 
(4)  Reissuance of TDR certificates. In the event of the transfer of fewer than all of a landowner's development rights, the landowner must return the original TDR certificate to the department upon the recordation of the conservation easement and deed of transfer. The landowner must provide a copy of the deed of transfer that contains the serial numbers of the development rights transferred. Within 95 days of the receipt of the complete TDR certificate, the department shall reissue a certificate to the landowner reflecting the remaining TDRs and the corresponding serial numbers. 
(b)  City tracking of TDRs, ownership, and application to property. 
(1)  Tracking TDR ownership. When TDRs are transferred, the buyer or receiver of the TDRs shall register the deed with the city and the change in ownership shall be recorded in the city's TDR registry. 
(2)  TDR application to receiving area property. When a TDR is affixed to a receiving area property, the director shall enter the information into the city's TDR registry, including the TDR serial number, the parcel IDs of the affected receiving area properties, and the new total number of density units assigned to each affected receiving area parcel. 
(c)  Recordation of transfer of development rights transactions (receiving areas). 
(1)  Deed of transfer. The deed of transfer shall be recorded with the city, which shall keep a record of the transaction in the city's TDR registry. 
(2)  Plat requirements. The following information shall be recorded on the face of any plat for property which receives development rights under the provisions of this article: 
a.  A statement that the development rights used in the plat have been transferred in accordance with the deed of transfer, prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
b.  The serial numbers of the TDRs conveyed along with a copy of the TDR certificate issued by the department. 
(d)  Approval of transfer of development rights and appeal process. A transfer of development rights shall be allowed by right. If the property and process meets the requirements of this article, the director shall approve the transfer. Approval of a development right does not confer to the receiving property an automatic approval to develop. All development projects are subject to the review and approval procedures in the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations. 
(e)  Appeal of transfer decision. Any appeal or other legal challenge to the director's final decision regarding a transfer of development rights shall be pursued by petition to the city council by filing, in writing, setting forth plainly and fully why the decision is in error. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the department's final decision. Upon appeal there is a presumption of correctness of the director's decision which must be overcome by the appealing party. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-26. - Legal status of TDRs. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66A-1, development rights made transferable pursuant to this article shall be interests in real property and shall be considered as such for purposes of conveyancing and taxation. Once a deed of transferable development rights created pursuant to section 14-25(a) has been sold, conveyed, or otherwise transferred by the owner of the parcel from which the development rights were derived, the transfer of development rights shall vest in the grantee and become freely alienable. For the purposes of ad valorem real property taxation, the value of a transferable development right shall be deemed appurtenant to the sending property until the transferable development right is registered as a distinct interest in real property with the appropriate tax assessor or the transferable development right is used at a receiving property and becomes appurtenant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-27. - Density transfer charges. 
The density transfer charge option is offered as a simpler, more targeted form of the TDR program. DTCs provide benefit to the city by allowing the city to target properties most important for protection. It can also provide funds that can be leveraged with grants and other programs to protect a larger number of properties. The development process also is more streamlined and transparent since the DTC option eliminates the need to research and negotiate terms for TDRs. 
(1)  Density transfer charge option. 
a.  TDR receiving site owners shall have the option of gaining bonus density by paying a density transfer charge (DTC) amount in lieu of each TDR that would otherwise be required. 
b.  DTC rates. The DTC rate shall be adopted annually by the city as a part of its fee schedule. The rate initially shall be determined by a mass appraisal of the city by an appraiser hired by the city who specializes in conservation easements. The appraisal shall be based on the per-acre value of development rights within the city. In subsequent years, when enough transfers have taken place, DTC rates shall be approved by the city council based on a representative sample of recent arms-length TDR transactions. 
(2)  Use of DTC funds. The city shall use DTC proceeds exclusively for the preservation of TDR sending sites, TDR program administration (not to exceed five percent of DTC receipts), or, upon separate approval by the city council, management of the city's open-space network. The city may combine DTC proceeds with funding from other sources in order to acquire TDR sending sites and TDR sending site easements. 
(3)  DTC application to receiving area property. When a DTC is applied to a receiving area development, the city shall assign a serial number to each DTC unit. As the development is platted, the DTCs are assigned to individual properties and the director shall enter the information into the city's TDR registry, including the DTC serial number, the parcel IDs of the affected receiving area properties, and the new total number of density units assigned to each affected receiving area parcel. 
(4)  DTC liquidation. 
a.  DTCs may be paid at the time of rezoning or may be paid at the time of issuance of building permits at the rate of 125 percent of the pro rata share of the original DTC value. 
b.  If the DTCs are paid with building permits, the charge per density unit used in the building permit shall be based on the change in density due to the rezoning divided by the number of density units of the rezoned property. The charge per density unit shall be calculated by the following method: 1.25 times DTC rate times (total density units of the rezoned property minus number of acres of rezoned property)/total density units of the rezoned property. This charge shall be paid at the time a building permit is issued. 
c.  Example. 
1.  Suppose the owner of 1,000 acres applied for a rezoning to VL (village). The minimum residential density in a VL district is two units per acre, meaning they could develop 2,000 units in the village. The number of DTCs assessed would be 2,000 (units) minus 1,000 (original acres) equals 1,000 DTCs. If the established rate per DTC were $4,000.00, the total assessed would be $4,000,000.00. 
2.  If the property owner were to opt to have the DTCs paid at the time of permitting, the amount charged per dwelling unit would be 1.25 times $4,000.00 per DTC times (2,000 total units minus 1,000 acres)/2,000 total units equals $2,000.00 per unit. 
3.  The property owner could also purchase the required number of TDRs on the open market, which in this case would be 1,000 TDRs. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-28. - Land trust. 
(a)  The city council may approve a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the city and land trust. This MOU would describe the roles and responsibilities of the city and the land trust in preserving rural land in the city. The MOU would authorize the land trust to utilize funds collected from DTCs to purchase TDRs or to purchase land fee simple, remove the development rights to create TDRs and subsequently sell or lease the land. The MOU would outline the development and the methods that would govern the land trust use of city funds to protect land by conservation easements. 
(b)  The MOU shall require an accounting of all funds provided to the land trust from density transfer charges and the number and location of acres preserved. The MOU shall also require that any income earned through conservation activities funded by DTCs shall be subject to the same restrictions as money collected directly from DTCs. 
(c)  The land trust is obligated to monitor and protect the land covered by conservation easements it owns in perpetuity. The MOU may authorize the land trust to utilize some nominal portion of the DTC funding to cover the costs of annual monitoring and reporting of the property on which the conservation easement is established and the cost of legal services to seek corrective actions in court in the event that the covenants of the conservation easement are violated and the land owner does not take corrective action. 
(d)  A conservation committee comprised of two residents of the city, two members of the board of the land trust and the executive director of the land trust must approve all real estate transactions such as the purchase of a conservation easement. The two resident members for the conservation committee are nominated by the mayor and approved by city council. The other members of the conservation committee are recommended by the executive director, if any, and approved by the board chair of the land trust. 
(e)  Members of the conservation committee serve three-year terms and may be appointed for one additional three-year term. Terms of membership on the committee are staggered to provide continuity from year to year. The executive director of the land trust is a permanent member of the conservation committee. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-139, § 9, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 14-29—14-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14-60—14-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 14-77. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The director of community development ("director") or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS) for Fulton County, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the director. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state, or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the director. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-78. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 14-77(d). All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, i.e., the "100-year flood." 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement a level below a floor of a building with a portion of the floor below grade. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director means the director of the city community development department. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before July 5, 2007. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 5, 2007. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map , or FIRM , means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after July 5, 2007, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 5, 2007. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city community development department to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is a condition in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 2, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-79. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located, without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any owner or developer desiring a permit for a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(3)  No land development permit will be approved for any land development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and, when required, future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and, when required, future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 14-81(b)(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 14-81(a)(5). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer and certified by same. 
(2)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all land development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the director shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 14-80 and 14-81; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 3, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-80. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then the director may require it to be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, then the director may require it to be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No construction or structures, including grading, filling, cutting or displacement of earth shall be allowed within the regulatory floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions regulatory flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the property; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the existing or future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of this section; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city community development department using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the existing or future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 14-81(d) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city community development department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the existing or future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a method approved by the city community development department. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles and future-conditions flood profiles, when required; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and, when required, future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all existing and, when required, future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except when required for the construction of bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(2)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city community development department. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city community development department. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-81. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the existing floodplain or the future-conditions floodplain when such limits have been determined. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified to comply by a professional engineer and meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is higher so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or, when required, future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the existing or future-conditions floodplain. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation adjacent to the building or at least as high as one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is highest. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the existing or future-conditions floodplain. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the director to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is highest, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the director. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings' substantial improvements, including the anchoring and elevation requirements above. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the existing or future-conditions floodplain. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the level of the highest base flood (100-year) elevation adjacent to the building or, at least one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the level of the highest base flood elevation adjacent to the building or at least, one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, when those elevations have been determined, whichever is higher. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation, data, base flood elevation floodway data or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. If sufficient data are not available from these sources, then the director may require a hydrologic assessment performed by a registered professional engineer to determine the base flood elevation and future-conditions flood elevation. Development for this situation shall comply with subsections (a) through (c) of this section. 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards for elevated buildings. The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the director the lowest floor elevation level complies and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file; 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data, and, when required, future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. Buildable area shall not be less than what is required per chapter 35, zoning; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structure(s) in accordance with section 14-79(b); 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(g)  Standards for utilities. 
(1)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(2)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located outside the floodplain to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 5, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-82. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The mayor and city council of the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variances from the requirements of this chapter. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  The mayor and city council of the city shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and city council may appeal such decision to the superior court of Fulton County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  All decisions of the county board of zoning appeals regarding properties located within the city limits of the city prior to January 1, 2008, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Such decisions of the county board of zoning appeals will have the same legal effect as if they were decisions of the mayor and city council of the city. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(i)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, or cause fraud on or victimization of the public. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(j)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the mayor and city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 6, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-83. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city community development department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city community development department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city community development department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, immediate action may be taken) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city community development department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city community development department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city community development department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city community development department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) after the department has taken one or more of the actions described above, it may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city community development department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 3, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 3, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 14-84—14-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 14-110. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city community development department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Director means director of the city community development department. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 14-112. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 2, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-112. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(1)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(2)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
b.  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the director as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
c.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the public works department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city community development department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 3, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-113. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city community development department prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-114. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city community development department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city community development department. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city community development department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city community development department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city community development department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the its designees. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city community development department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city community development department access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city community development department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the community development department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 5, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-115. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city community development department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 6, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-116. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city community development department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The community development department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city community development department finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city community development department. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal shall take place before the mayor and city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the mayor and city council upholding the decision of the city community development department, then representatives of the department may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or agent in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(1)  Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city community development department shall deem appropriate, after the department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city community development department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this v is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. 
(1)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city community development department may seek cumulative remedies. 
(2)  The city community development department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 4, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 4, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 14-117—14-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 14-146. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(7)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(8)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria, or as otherwise required by the director: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director to be a hotspot land use; or 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsection (b)(1)a and b of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project and involve less than one acre of land disturbance and that land disturbance is less than 25 percent of the total lot area or the new impervious surface area is less than 10,000 square feet; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family residential structure meeting the same land disturbance and impervious surface thresholds provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director. 
(c)  Designation of administrator. The director or a designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant city addenda (or equivalent city stormwater management design manual), for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-147. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Director means director of city community development department. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities limited to remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation as determined by engineering studies, in a manner which enhances and promotes the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that effects stormwater management and which controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 2, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-148. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city community development department a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose or as part of the land disturbance or building permitting process. 
(3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond or surety, if deemed applicable; and 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(1)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer shall meet with the city community development department for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(2)  To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
a.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); limits of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
b.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, potential wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and limits of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as jurisdictional wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, state waters, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
c.  Stormwater management system concept plan. 
1.  A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
2.  Local watershed plans, the city greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in this section. 
(2)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
a.  Common address and legal description of site. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using guidelines established by the director for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this section; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in this section must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and engineering design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this section; drawings, engineering design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting engineering calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access for the parties responsible for maintenance, from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city community development department as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d) of this section. 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city community development department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city community development department requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city community development department, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city community development department prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(3)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless expressly accepted by a governmental agency in writing, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(4)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(5)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city community development department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 14-151. 
(6)  The city community development department, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may expressly accept in writing dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city community development department. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in this section (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). For single-family residential homes that are not part of a subdivision or phased development and are not exempt pursuant to section 14-146(b)(2)a and b the director may vary the requirements of this article when such changes are deemed appropriate. 
(3)  The city community development department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city community development department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (e)(3) of this section and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city community development department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city community development department may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. The issuance of a land development, building or land disturbance permit in conjunction with a related inspection and maintenance agreement, does not indicate or create an acceptance by the city of any inspection or maintenance responsibilities under the terms of said inspection or maintenance agreement. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city community development department shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city community development department; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 14-150. 
(f)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city community development department and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building or land disturbance permit for the development. 
(g)  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city community development department which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Excessive (damaging) streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations; or 
f.  Premature loss of overbank trees, critical vegetation, or utilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 3, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-149. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city community development department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. 
a.  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city community development department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
b.  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city community development department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-150. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(1)  Periodic and annual inspections of the stormwater management system construction may be conducted by the staff of the city community development department and/or as required by the city, and shall be conducted and certified by a registered professional engineer in Georgia who has been approved by the city community development department using certification forms as may be required by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(2)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; the specific measurements, volumes, elevations, and outlet control structure dimensions; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)  If any variations or violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a final plat and certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications and dimensions for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a registered professional engineer in Georgia. A final inspection by the city community development department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 5, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-151. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance and inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of an inspection and maintenance agreement, an approved plan, standard maintenance practices or this article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person. Those facilities which are subject to an approved inspection and maintenance agreement shall be inspected in accordance with that agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city community development department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan, or the property owner on which the facility exists, by registered or certified mail. The notice shall specify the need to comply with the agreement, the plan or, in the absence of an agreement or approved plan, standard maintenance practices and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement or notice as provided herein, the city community development department, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the city community development department may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city community development department when requested. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement or the standards contained herein, the city community development department, after ten days' written notice (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, immediate action may be taken), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city community development department may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 6, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-152. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city community development department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city community development department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city community development department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, immediate action may be taken) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city community development department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city community development department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city community development department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city community development department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated, upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary, to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city community development department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city community development department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 5, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 5, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 14-153—14-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 14-173. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Chattahoochee Hills Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-174. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. The community development department of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing streambanks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 2, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream. 
Director means director of the city community development department. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city community development department required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 14-146(b) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any conveyance, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city community development department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Streambank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 3, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-176. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water, including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance streambank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(2)a of this section. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. Notification of timber harvesting activities shall be provided as required by article IX of this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
g.  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(b)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 14-177(b). 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-177. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and city council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
b.  Except as provided above, the mayor and city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and city council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(2)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
(3)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
a.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
1.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
2.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
3.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
4.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
5.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
6.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
7.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
8.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
b.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
2.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
3.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
4.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
5.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
6.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 5, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-178. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
(a)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(b)  Additional standards which apply and will be enforced by the city are: 
(1)  Metropolitan River Protection Act and Chattahoochee Corridor Plan requires a 50-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer and 150-foot impervious surface setback on the Chattahoochee and its impoundments and a 35-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer (all measured from the edge of the water) on perennial tributary streams in a Corridor extending 2,000 feet from either bank of the river and its impoundments. The Corridor extends from Buford Dam to the downstream limits of the Atlanta region (Douglas and Fulton Counties). Streams in the basin of the Corridor are required to be protected by buffers, but no required width is specified (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.). 
(2)  DNR Part 5 Criteria for Small (under 100 square miles) Water Supply Watersheds Authorized under Part V of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 require 100-foot undisturbed buffers and 150-foot setbacks on all perennial streams within seven miles upstream of a public water supply reservoir or public water supply intake. Beyond seven miles, the required buffer is 50 feet and the required setback is 75 feet. Equivalent protection measures can be adopted with approval from Georgia DCA and DNR. 
(3)  DNR Part 5 Criteria for River Protection Authorized under the 1991 Mountains and River Corridors Protection Act require a 100-foot buffer along rivers with average annual flows of greater than 400 cfs (excepting the portion of the Chattahoochee referenced above). The buffer is measured from the top of the streambank. 
(4)  Other such state and federal regulations as may be adopted from time to time. 
(c)  While the requirements of this article are intended to apply to all streams in the city, special conditions may exist that require greater protection. Nothing in this article should be construed as preventing the establishment of wider and/or more restrictive buffers and setbacks as required under any other existing or future legislation. In addition, nothing in this article should be construed as preventing the establishment of wider buffers for purposes of protecting greenspace, preserving habitat or other goals that may not be specifically mandated by legislation. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 6, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-179. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-180. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a land disturbance permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 8, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 8, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-181. - Inspection. 
(a)  The department of community development may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the department in making such inspections. The department of community development shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 9, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 9, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-182. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. 
a.  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in an activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
b.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, immediate action may be taken) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city community development department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in (appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders) court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 10, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 10, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-183. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city community development department, may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the director of the department and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and city council of the city within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(c)  Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 6, § 11, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 6, § 11, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 14-184—14-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 14-205. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The Chattahoochee Hills Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance of 2008." 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-206. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to establish soil erosion and sedimentation control minimum requirements, standards, and enforcement procedures for land disturbance activities in order to conserve and protect the environment, public health, and the general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 2, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-207. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
100-year floodplain means land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which will, when properly designed, installed and maintained, provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified as O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation that facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation (the depth below the original ground surface to the excavated surface). 
Department means the city department of community development. 
Development means the alteration of property for any purpose involving building, subdividing, and/or the preparation of land for any of the above purposes. Development includes, but is not limited to, providing utilities, access, parking, stormwater management, sewage disposal systems, and/or construction of a structure. 
Development sequence means the sequence of activities to be completed, in order, during the development of a land disturbance project as per approved construction plans. 
Director means the director (or his designees) of the city department of community development. 
Director, DPW, means the director of the department of public works or his designee. 
Director, EPD, means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual means a field manual produced by the state soil and water conservation commission that illustrates vegetative and structural best management practices (BMPs), and their use for land-disturbing activities. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land disturbance activity to be maintained until project completion, that is designed to minimize soil erosion, protect state waters and prevent off-site sedimentation. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or elevation. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the elevation of the ground surface as measured from sea level prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-208. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purpose of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or survey marking, indicating that construction activities will occur on a specific plot. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. , which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means original site topography/ground surface prior to land disturbance activities. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Notice of violation means enforcement action based on noncompliance through failure to either properly install or maintain best management practices, where sediments remain within the boundaries of the property. This enforcement action provides the violator five days to achieve compliance. 
Official notice means a posting of a notice of violation or stop work order on a property that is noncompliant or in violation. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, owner, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Phased development means the development of tracts in maximum of 25-acre increments. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Re-inspection fee means a fee assessed to the developer/owner/operator or responsible party for re-inspecting the project if requested by the developer/owner/operator or responsible party prior to the end of the compliance period, provided that upon that re-inspection the project remains out of compliance. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, catch basin, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way (public or private) consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover by the installation of temporary or permanent structures or vegetation for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, ditches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage system, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stop work order means an enforcement action that ceases all work on-site or a portion of the site. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means practices for the stabilizing of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control measures are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways, outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, sediment barriers, etc. Such measures as defined in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Turbidity means a measure of clarity of a water sample. 
Underbrush means any small shrubs, ground cover, or similar plants growing beneath the canopy of mature trees. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding; covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such practices can be found in the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and including any area adjacent there to subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 3, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-208. - Exemptions to article. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, Mineral Resources and Caves Act; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this Section; provided, however, that constriction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this subsection and section 14-209. For single-family residential construction covered by provisions of this subsection, there shall be a minimum buffer zone of 25 feet between the residence and any state waters, additional buffers may be required by the city in accordance with article VII of this chapter. In any such buffers, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks The minimum requirements of section 14-209 and the buffer zones provided by this section or article VII of this chapter, whichever is greater, shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in article VII of this chapter or section 14-209(c)(15), whichever is greater, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. Timber harvesting activities shall be required to provide notification to the city in accordance with article IX of this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resource Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving disturbance of one acre or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, state waters excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one acre or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of the section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed, in whole or in part, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb once or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A § 12-7-6 and section 14-209 of this chapter as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; copies of any plans approved under that section shall be provided to the director; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power, except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and section 14-209 of this chapter as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 4, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-209. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. Soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (c) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 Nephelometric turbidity units. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines issued by the director, EPD. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute noncompliance with any land disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such failure occurs. When such noncompliance is identified by the director, official notice will be posted on that property or provided to the property owner, contractor, developer or person in charge of or conducting the land disturbing activities. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur as outlined by the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System requirements. 
(c)  Protections. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and/or minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Proper erosion control measures must be installed along site boundaries prior to land disturbing activities. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner to minimize erosion and prevent soil erosion from leaving the site. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to minimum erosion potential. 
(4)  Natural vegetation that is beyond the permitted limits of land disturbance shall be retained, and whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized by the close of each business day for utilities, For all other activities, disturbed soil shall be stabilized as soon as practical but within 14 calendar days for all areas that have reached final grade or are idle. 
(6)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect all exposed areas (especially steep cuts and/or banks, etc.) during development. 
(7)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed upon achieving final grade. 
(8)  Sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, sediment barriers, construction exits or similar best management practices as outlined in the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this section, and O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(9)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(10)  Where cuts and fills are located adjacent to neighboring properties, sound engineering practices or methods shall be employed to protect those adjoining properties. 
a.  All slopes shall be stabilized immediately and shall remain so for a period of no less than one year from the issuance of the project's final certificate of occupancy and/or the recording of a final plat. 
b.  All slopes greater than or equal to 3H:IV must be permanently stabilized with structural or vegetative best management practices. 
c.  A plan must be submitted to demonstrate that all slopes associated with fill/cut sections have been adequately designed to be stabilized structurally (such as retaining walls) or vegetatively (erosion mat/blanket, tree bark mulch, etc.). Such analysis, reports, or design shall be prepared and approved by a certified design professional. 
(11)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels. 
(12)  Migrated soil materials or soil materials displaced by mechanical means from land disturbing sites to adjacent watercourses, such as lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, etc., must be remediated. The remedial work shall be conducted as per a remedial plan approved by the city. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of temporary or permanent bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, those crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(15)  Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director, EPD determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment where otherwise allowed by the director, EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director, EPD as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer. 
a.  No land-disturbance activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed, except as otherwise provided by this subsection (15). 
b.  Temporary structural best management practices are required to be removed at the completion of project. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim underbrush in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
c.  Except as otherwise described in this article, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director, EPD determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director, EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where drainage structures or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by director, EPD as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer. 
d.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  In addition to the buffer established in subsection (c)(15) of this section, the city has also established an additional local stream buffer as defined in article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 5, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-210. - Land disturbance application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer, and designated planners and engineers shall review any general development plans and detailed plans that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning resolution, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, stream buffer protection ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Prior to any land-disturbing activity, the property in question must be part of an approved and recorded legal lot of record (exemption plat, minor plat, or final plat). Additionally, no land-disturbing activity, including grading, excavating, filling, and/or foundation work, shall be conducted within the city, until a land-disturbance permit or a building permit (for those projects not requiring a land-disturbance permit under this article) shall have been issued by the director allowing such activity, pursuant to the provisions herein provided. If a project is to be developed in phases, then a separate land disturbance permit or building permit is required for each phase. Where the total disturbed acreage for the project or phase exceeds 25 acres, a phased erosion, sediment and pollution control plan shall be submitted which indicates no more than 25 acres of land disturbance at any given time. Additional land may be disturbed as soon as temporary or permanent stabilization measures, as defined in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition, have been implemented. In no case shall the area of active land disturbance exceed 25 acres with the prior approval of the director. 
(2)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the department of community development or its successor to perform such activity. 
(3)  All developments, construction, improvements, utilities, and demolitions that occur within the boundaries of the incorporated limits of the city that disturb more than one acre of land or are part of larger common plan of development with a planned land disturbance of one acre or greater shall be required to submit an application for a land-disturbance permit. 
(4)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the department of community development and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 14-209(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by the specified number of copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and a physical address of the property owner (post office box not acceptable). All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(5)  A minimum fee, as set by the city council, shall be charged for each acre, or fraction thereof, of the project area. 
(6)  The permit applicant may be required to post a bond (surety) in a form acceptable to the director of community development prior to issuing the permit. The bond amount shall be determined as established by the department. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These corrective actions may include, but are not limited to, desilting detention ponds, water bodies, stormwater facilities, roadways, installing a fence with locking device, reestablishing damaged buffers, and similar or related actions. If a permit applicant has had two or more outstanding violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(c)  Plan requirements. Refer to the city erosion and sedimentation control plan administrative guidelines for procedures and requirements concerning the review and approval of construction plans. 
(d)  Permits and development activity. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, provided that any necessary variances have been obtained, bonding has been provided, and specifications developed, maintained and permitted by the department of community development have been met. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 14-209(c)(15) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase to include the development sequence. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him of the conditions contained in the permit as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan. 
(5)  Sedimentation basins shall not be allowed in state waters or other perennially flowing streams. 
(6)  The permittee shall ensure that engineering and construction on any land within the city shall be carried out in such a manner as to protect neighboring persons and property from damage or loss resulting from stormwater runoff, soil erosion, or deposition upon private property or public streets or water-transported silt or debris. 
(7)  The director during field inspections may require revisions, addendum, and modifications that address any and all features to ensure compliance with this article and any permit issued hereunder. 
(8)  It shall constitute noncompliance with this article to engage in land-disturbance activity involving clearing, grading, or grubbing without a permit, which activity may immediately warrant citation(s). Timber harvesting activities shall require notification in accordance with the standards provided in article IX of this chapter and O.C.G.A § 12-6-24. 
(9)  Design and installation of properly functioning detention facilities, including outflow and overflow control devices, shall be the responsibility of the owner. If any erosion control devices are damaged or destroyed during grading or construction, all construction processes shall cease until the devices are restored to their functioning capability. The owner, through application for grading or construction permits, accepts the responsibility of maintenance of the control devices. 
(10)  The owner and operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of the storm drainage facilities during grading, construction, and for a 15-month period following the final approval of the completed project. Maintenance will be construed to include preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment or the detention basin and sedimentation ponds, in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy, and freedom from sediment of all drainage structures; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
(11)  The developer shall provide stabilization by covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging, or pivoting, producing long-term vegetative cover, temporary seeding producing short-term vegetative cover, sodding or covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass; and security fences for safety purposes at detention facilities as prescribed by and prior to approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 6, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-211. - City or county construction; compliance with article. 
All engineering and construction involving land disturbance performed by or on behalf of the city and under the direction of the department of public works or any other city entity, whether such engineering or construction is being accomplished on existing and proposed public land or on public easement, shall comply with the requirements of sections 14-209 and 14-215. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-212. - Residential construction. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the construction of single-family detached dwellings shall be subject to the following rules: 
(1)  Building permit. No land disturbing activity or other work (including moving and demolition) shall commence on a project until the owner or the contractor undertaking the work shall have applied for, and been issued, a land disturbance permit or building permit by the director. The owner/contractor shall prominently display on site the building permit, a signed erosion and sedimentation control agreement and approved site plan in full public view, until issuance of certification of occupancy. Demolition projects shall be required to install best management practices where necessary to prevent erosion. Failure to install best management practices shall constitute noncompliance with this article. 
(2)  Notice of violation. The director shall issue a notice of violation for failure to either install or maintain best management practices, even though sediments remain contained within the boundaries of the property by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, sediment barriers, and construction exits in accordance with this article. Subsequently, a stop work order shall be issued if compliance with a notice of violation is not achieved by the end of the specified compliance period of five days. 
(3)  Stop work order. The director or representative shall issue an order to cease all work ("stop work order") on a project covered by this section if any work on that project is proceeding without a land disturbance permit or building permit, or, when silt, mud, or other waterborne debris leave the property boundary, or (if such a permit has been issued) it is found by the director or representative that all or any portion of the project remains out of compliance with any requirements of section 14-209(b) or (c), any other provision of this article or any other city ordinance, regulation or requirement after the specified compliance period or a site has been in violation at least two prior occurrences, to include any applicable fines and penalties. All other requirements of section 14-215(b) also apply to projects covered by this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 8, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 8, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-213. - Progress report required. 
(a)  The licensed professional referenced in the administrative guidelines or his representative as approved by the director shall ensure, inspect and evaluate the installation of best management practices within one week after the initial construction activities commence and the initial-phase best management practices have been installed. All deficiencies shall be corrected within two business days after inspection, and a written report with a summary of corrective measures taken shall be submitted to the director within three days after inspection. This report shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer and shall be prepared by a professional licensed to practice such activity within the state, as stipulated in the city soil erosion and sediment control administrative guidelines. The report shall record the quality and progress of the work required to show full compliance with the provisions of this article, including compliance with or adherence to vegetative practices. In order to ensure full compliance with the approved construction plans, final approval will be withheld until as-built drawings, prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice such work in the state, have been submitted and accepted by the director. The director shall withhold the occupancy permit until full compliance has been achieved. 
(b)  Additional reporting requirements. When applicable, applicants/owners/operators shall provide the director with a copy of any monitoring results submitted to EPD regarding National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Reports shall be in a format as prescribed by EPD. A copy of the notice of intent which has been sent to EPD in compliance with the permit requirements must be presented to the department of community development prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 9, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 9, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-214. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the approved plan, permit and this article and to determine if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling soil erosion and sedimentation. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, an official notice shall be posted on-site, and as a courtesy a written notice of violation shall also be served upon that person, except for working without a permit or working under a stop work order, which warrant immediate citations. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply with the corrective measures specified in the posted official notice within the time specified, he shall be found in violation of this article, and the director may take such additional enforcement actions as he deems appropriate. 
(b)  The director shall have the power to conduct any such investigation as the director may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the duties prescribed in this article, and for this purpose shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purposes of investigation and inspection of the sites of land disturbance or building activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties, including, but not limited to, the review of reports, studies, calculations, drawings, revisions, practices, actions and bonds. 
(d)  A copy of a current approved plan shall be kept on site until project completion or issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 10, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 10, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-215. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit, as prescribed in this article, without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit, or other authorization to conduct any business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. Failure to comply may result in a citation being issued to appear in municipal court which may result in monetary fines. 
(b)  Stop work orders and notice of violation. 
(1)  On development and residential land disturbance sites for the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director shall post an official notice of violation and, as a courtesy, may issue a written letter. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director shall issue a stop work order requiring the land-disturbance activity be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of notice of violation. For the third and each subsequent violation, the director shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(2)  All stop work orders shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action has occurred. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any representative of the owner to remove an official notice of violation or stop work posting. If this action is observed by a city representative, the owner will be responsible for any and all possible fines. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the director or representative shall post official notice at such locations on the project site as deemed appropriate. Such posted official notice shall be prominently displayed on the owner's property until the stop work order is rescinded by the director, at which time said posted notice will be removed by the director or representative. When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Reinspection fee. The director shall assess a minimum $50.00 reinspection fee to a project if a reinspection is requested prior to the end of a compliance period and the site is found to remain out of compliance upon that inspection. Such fees (to cover administrative, field inspections, and transportation costs) must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a final erosion inspection or a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan and permit, an official notice of violation shall be posted on-site and a letter will be issued as a courtesy. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one. The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site and bring it into compliance. 
(e)  Noncompliance. Noncompliance with this article shall be dealt with as follows: any person found to be in noncompliance with any provision of this article shall be served official notice by the department of community development. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take all necessary action to gain compliance and shall permanently cease such noncompliance. 
(f)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(1)  The following minimum penalties shall be imposed: 
a.  Conducting land-disturbance activities without a land-disturbance permit or building permit (first offense): $250.00 for each violation or each day on which a violation exists. 
b.  Conducting land-disturbance activities without a land-disturbance permit or building permit (second or subsequent offense): $1,000.00 for each violation or each day on which a violation exists. 
c.  Lack of proper installation or maintenance of structural/vegetative best management practices: $250.00 per violation. 
d.  Working under a stop work order (first offense): $500.00. 
e.  Working under a stop work order (second or subsequent offense): $1,500.00. 
(2)  Upon violation of the provisions of this article, the city shall be entitled to take such remedial action as the director deems necessary to ensure compliance, and the violator shall reimburse the city for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts and the city shall be entitled to place a lien on the property to secure payment and reimbursement for these expenses. 
(3)  The director of the department of community development has the primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Persons designated by the director are hereby authorized to issue official notices, citations, and/or summons charging violations under this article, returnable to the municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 11, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 11, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-216. - Education and certification. 
After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 12, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 12, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-217. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The issuance of a stop work order, as well as the suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of this article shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the director of written request for appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 13, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 13, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-218. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city, the district or their officers, employees or agents for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 7, § 14, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 7, § 14, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 14-219—14-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 14-245. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to cultivate and encourage a high level of tree preservation, to promote the general provisions within this article, and to develop detailed provisions within the administrative guidelines in order to implement the regulations set forth to preserve, maintain, and replant trees within the city. The intent of the article and administrative guidelines is to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development, building construction and timber harvest processes. It is not the intent of this article to regulate individual properties where activities do not require a land disturbance, building construction or timber harvest permit. 
(b)  Benefits to citizens derived from tree protection and replanting include: 
(1)  Improved control of soil erosion. 
(2)  Moderation of stormwater runoff and improved water quality. 
(3)  Interception of airborne particulate matter and the reduction of some air pollutants. 
(4)  Enhanced habitat for desirable wildlife. 
(5)  Reduction of noise and glare. 
(6)  Climate moderation. 
(7)  Aesthetics and scenic amenity. 
(8)  Increased property value. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 1, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-246. - Authority and applicability. 
(a)  The administrative guidelines referenced in this article are hereby adopted by the city, with the copies on file in the office of the clerk of the city, and the same are incorporated herein as if set out in full, and the provisions of the same shall be controlling. 
(b)  Terms and provisions of the tree preservation ordinance and the administrative guidelines established herein, shall apply to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the city. No land disturbance permit shall be issued by the city community development department or any successor to that department, without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(c)  The terms and provisions of these regulations shall also apply to construction of new single family detached and duplex dwellings, including additions, renovations and/or alterations to existing single-family detached and duplex dwellings on any lot that was created or subdivided after June 5, 2018, not to include properties subdivided by the minor subdivision process. 
(d)  The terms and provisions of these regulations shall also apply to timber harvesting activities, except as provided under O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
(e)  The terms and provisions of these regulations shall also apply to vegetation management of all utility lines. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 2, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-247. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative guidelines means those certain guidelines, including any appendices, existing or as future amended, incorporated by reference into the tree preservation ordinance of the city in this article, which have been adopted by the city council of the city from time to time to provide standards for the protection, preservation, and replacement of trees, and which are regulated and enforced by the city arborist in conjunction with the department of community development or its designated agent through development and construction permits and processes. Copies of the same are kept on file in the office of the clerk of the city and available for public inspection during business hours. 
Agent, designated or authorized, means an individual or entity authorized to administer and enforce the standards set forth in the city tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
Buildable area means the portion of a parcel of land where a building may be located and which shall contain enough square footage to meet the minimum required by the zoning district. That portion which is not located in the minimum setbacks, utility corridors, driveways, slopes to build streets, tree save areas, landscape strips, specimen tree areas, state water buffer, tributary buffers, zoning buffers, wetlands, stormwater and sanitary sewer easements. 
Buffer. 
State waters buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Tributary buffer means a protection area adjoining the tributaries of the Chattahoochee River. Tributary buffer specifications are contained in each prospective land use section of the city tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
Zoning buffer means a natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. Buffer is achieved with natural vegetation and must be replanted subject to the approval of the director of the community development department or his designated agent when sparsely vegetated. Cleaning of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited except when accomplished under the supervision of the director of the community development department or his designee. 
Caliper means the standard for trunk measurements of nursery stocks. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Cambial dieback means the irreparable radial or vertical interruption of a tree's cambium, usually caused by mechanical damage, such as skinning bark or from excessive heat. 
Cambium means tissue within the woody portion of trees and shrubs which gives rise to the woody water and nutrient conducting system and the energy substrate transport system in trees. Cambium growth activity results in a tree's radial development (i.e., increase in diameter). 
City arborist means the agent of the city assigned to the community development department and having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of the tree preservation ordinance. 
Clear cutting means the removal of all trees from a property, whether by cutting or other means, excluding stream buffer requirements. 
Coniferous means belonging to the group of cone-bearing evergreen trees or shrubs. 
Critical root zone means the area of the trees roots represented by a circle around the tree with a radius of 1.5 feet for each inch of trunk D.B.H. Disturbances within this zone will directly affect a tree's chance for survival. 
Crown drip line means a vertical line extending down to the ground from the end of a tree's longest branches. 
D.B.H. or diameter-at-breast-height means a standard measure of tree size (for trees existing on-site) and is a tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 54 inches above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 54 inches, the D.B.H. is determined by adding together the diameters of each trunk measured at 54 inches above the ground. 
Deciduous means not persistent; the shedding of leaves annually. 
Director means the director of the city community development department. 
Erosion and sedimentation control ordinance means the ordinance adopted by the city that regulates soil erosion and its transportation to the city's lakes, rivers, and streams (latest revision). 
Improvement setback means an area adjacent to a zoning buffer in which no improvements and/or structures shall be constructed. No development activity such as tree removal, stump removal or grinding, land disturbance or grading is permitted without the approval of the director of the community development department or his designee. 
Land disturbance permit means a permit issued by the community development department that authorizes the commencement of alteration or development of a given tract of land or the commencement of any land disturbing activity. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in the city soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
Landscape plan means a plan that identifies areas of tree preservation and methods of tree protection within the protected zone, as well as all areas of replanting. Within replanting areas, the common and botanical names of the proposed species, the number of plants of each species, the size of all plant materials, the proposed location of all plant materials, and any unique features of the plant materials shall be indicated. 
Landscape strip means an area required by this article, by the city zoning ordinance, or any condition of zoning, use permit or variance approval, which is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials. 
Minimum setback means the minimum yards as specified in the regulations related to the zoning districts or use permit categories; a minimum required space between a property line and a structure; an area identified by a building line. 
Protected zone means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All areas required as landscape strips and/or buffers (including zoning buffers, state water buffers, and tributary buffers); 
(2)  Tree save areas according to provisions of the city zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval, and/or the tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
(3)  The critical root zone of any tree within the areas listed in (a) and (b), above. 
Re-vegetation means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials to satisfy the minimum tree density and landscape requirements, as determined by the city zoning ordinance, condition of zoning, use permit or variance approval, or the tree preservation ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
Root collar means the point of attachment of major woody roots to the tree trunk, usually at or near the groundline and associated with a marked swelling of the tree trunk. 
Root respiration means an active process occurring throughout the feeder root system of trees and involving the consumption of oxygen and sugars with the release of energy and carbon-dioxide. Root respiration facilitates the uptake and transport of minerals and nutrients essential for tree survival. 
Roots. 
Feeder roots means a complex system of small annual roots growing outward and predominantly upward from the system of transport roots. These roots branch four or more times to form fans or mats of thousands of fine, short, non-woody tips. Many of these small roots and their multiple tips are 0.2 to one mm or less in diameter and less than one to two mm long. These roots constitute the major fraction of a tree's root system surface area and are the primary sites of absorption of water and nutrients. 
Major woody roots means first order tree roots originating at the root collar and growing horizontally in the soil to a distance of between three and 15 feet from the tree's trunk. These roots branch and decrease in diameter to give rise to rope roots. The primary functions of major woody roots include anchorage, structural support, the storage of food reserves, and the transport of minerals and nutrients. 
Rope roots means an extensive network of woody second order roots arising from major woody roots, occurring within the surface 12 to 18 inches of local soils, and with an average size ranging from 0.25 to one inch in diameter. The primary function of rope roots is the transport of water and nutrients and the storage of food reserves. 
Transport roots means the system or framework of tree roots comprised of major woody roots and rope roots. 
Setback means a space between a property line and the line to which a building or specified structure may be constructed. 
Soil compaction means a change in soil physical properties which includes an increase in soil weight per unit volume and a decrease in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. As related to tree roots, compacted soil can cause physical root damage, a decrease in soil oxygen levels with an increase in toxic gasses, and can be impervious to new root development. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Thinning means selective cutting or removal of timber. The basal unit of 30 units per acre for commercial districts and all other non-single-family districts; 20 units per acre for single-family residential districts; and 15 units per acre for agricultural districts shall be maintained after selective cutting, or removal of timber has occurred. 
Timber harvesting means the felling of timber products for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside the state. The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear cutting and thinning of timber only as they qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, are not incidental to development and occurs on tracts of land which are zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural purposes. Timber harvesters shall follow the "Best Management Practices" published by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
Tree. 
Heritage tree means a tree which is designated upon approval by the director of the community development department or his designee to be of notable historical value or interest because of its age, size, or historical association. 
Specimen tree means any tree which has been determined by the city arborist to be of high value because of its type, size, age, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated according to administrative standards established by the community development department. The following automatically shall qualify as specimen trees: 
(1)  Conifers: 30" D.B.H. or larger. 
(2)  Deciduous: 24" D.B.H. or larger. 
(3)  Understory: 8" D.B.H. or larger. 
Stand of specimen trees means a contiguous grouping of trees which has been determined to be of value by the director of the community development department or authorized designee. Examples include: 
(1)  A relatively mature even aged stand. 
(2)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
(3)  A stand of historical significance. 
(4)  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above the ground level and which normally obtains a height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree bank means a site such as a school or public park, where the owner/developer shall donate and plant the required trees when it is not feasible to plant the required trees within their site's project area. 
Tree preservation ordinance means this article, approved and adopted by the city council of the city to provide standards for the protection, preservation and replacement of trees regulated and enforced by the city arborist in conjunction with the department of community development or designated agent through development and construction permits and processes. 
Tree save area means all areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Tributary means any perennial stream, or portion thereof, within the affected area that is portrayed as a solid blue line on the United States Geological Survey 7.5 Quadrangle Maps, 1968 edition, or other perennial streams as identified by the city. 
Utility vegetation management means the removal of trees, underbrush, vines and the pruning of trees to maintain utility services. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bog, and similar areas. 
Zoning regulations means the zoning ordinance of the city as amended or such regulations subsequently adopted by the city council inclusive of conditions of zoning, use permit or variance approval established pursuant thereto. 
(b)  All other terms. All other words or phrases as appropriate to the context of their uses shall be interpreted as defined in the zoning regulations in chapter 35. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 3, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 3, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-248. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  All applications for a preliminary plat shall provide a specimen tree survey and inventory for all areas of the tract within the planned area of disturbance. All applications and required supplemental information shall be submitted to the director of the community development department. 
(b)  All applications for a land disturbance permit shall provide a landscape plan and other documentation as required and as applicable for all areas of the tract of land within a protected zone. All applications for a land disturbance permit shall provide a specimen tree survey and inventory for any area that is proposed for disturbance but that was not included in a specimen tree survey and inventory within the preceding 12 months. All applications and required supplemental information shall be submitted to the director of the community development department. 
(c)  All landscape plans and related documentation shall be reviewed by the city arborist for conformance to the provisions of these regulations and either approved, returned for revisions, or denied within 30 days of receipt. If denied or returned for revisions the reasons for denial or revision shall be annotated on the landscape plan or stated in writing. 
(d)  Issuance of a valid land disturbance permit shall constitute an approval of the required landscape plan and shall indicate conformance to the provisions of these regulations. 
(e)  For issuance of any residential building permit, the applicant must sign and agree to abide by the residential erosion and sedimentation control tree protection agreement (see appendix H to the administrative guidelines). This shall also apply to parcels upon which a land disturbance permit has been previously issued with a tree protection plan approved by the city arborist. The director of the community development department, or his designee, is authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the city. 
(f)  Any applicant conducting activities which require notification of timber harvesting agrees to maintain a 25-foot undisturbed buffer along the entire perimeter of the property. This buffer must be maintained for the duration of the timber harvesting activity. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 4, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 4, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-249. - Removal of trees. 
(a)  If the owner/developer proposes to remove any trees in the protected zone, then the owner/developer must document a hardship such as but not limited to economic or zoning restrictions and submit it as part of the application for a land disturbance permit. The application shall be subject to the approval of the director of the community development department, or his designee, before any trees are to be removed from the site. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to allow the removal of vegetation in a natural, undisturbed buffer required by chapter 35, zoning. 
(b)  When no trees are present in the protected zone or when disturbance of any portion of the protected zone is approved, it shall be the responsibility of the owner/developer to re-vegetate said areas (in which improvements are not constructed) with trees or other plant materials subject to zoning regulations or, in lieu thereof, administrative standards established by the community development department. 
(c)  Not withstanding any of the other requirements of these regulations, it shall be unlawful to remove a specimen tree without the express written permission of the city arborist or authorized agent. Administrative standards have been established by the director of the community development department for the identification, preservation and protection of specimen trees. 
(d)  Any removal of specimen trees authorized by the city arborist, not including utility vegetation management, must be replaced by planting trees at the rate of 1.5 caliper inches per one inch DBH of the tree removed. Replacement trees shall be planted on the subject site, on public property, or on school property, and shall have a minimum four-inch tree caliper, and shall be of species with potentials for size and quality comparable to the specimen trees removed. As an alternative to planting replacement trees, a payment of recompense may be made to the city according to a schedule adopted by the city council. Such funds shall be reserved exclusively for the following uses: 
(1)  Planting of trees on public or school property. 
(2)  Maintaining trees. 
(3)  Tree-related educational or interpretive materials. 
(4)  Preservation of property. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 5, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 5, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-250. - Violations. 
Citations for any of the following violations, by authorized city enforcement agents, may constitute issuance of an immediate stop work order: 
(1)  Land disturbance and/or tree removal within state water, tributary, or zoning buffers. 
(2)  Land disturbance and/or tree removal within tree save areas. 
(3)  Illegal removal or disturbance of specimen trees, heritage trees or stands of trees. 
(4)  Improper installation of tree fencing. 
(5)  Other violations of any provisions of this article established pursuant thereto, including appendices. 
(6)  Failure to follow ANSI A300 Guidelines for Tree Care Practices. 
(7)  Failure to follow ANSI Z-133 Tree Work Safety Standards. 
(8)  Failure to follow the Georgia Forestry Commission's Best Management Practices for Timber Harvesting. 
(9)  Failure to follow BMP for Utility Vegetation Management, as published by the International Society of Arborculture (ISA). 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 6, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 6, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-251. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of the department of community development and designated agent to enforce this article. The department of community development and designated agent(s) shall have the authority to modify, revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof. 
(b)  The director of the community development department and designated agent shall serve as the issuing authority and shall have the power to withhold all permits, including, but not limited to, final certificates of occupancy, building permits and all permits on the subject site until it is determined by the issuing authority that the site complies with this article and the provisions of the formal plan approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 7, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 7, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-252. - Inspections. 
(a)  The community development department is the issuing authority and may cause inspection of compliance to be made periodically by its designated agent(s) during the course of the project and shall make a final inspection following the completion of the work. Applicants shall cooperate with the issuing authority in conducting such inspections. 
(b)  The community development department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, including, but not limited to, the power to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land disturbing or tree removal activities. 
(c)  The director of the community development department is authorized to design and implement an inspection program involving private inspectors acceptable to the department. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for the purpose of inspection and who presents appropriate identification, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 8, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 8, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-253. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person, firm, or corporation has: 
(1)  Engaged in land disturbing or other activities, which have resulted in the removal of trees; or 
(2)  Failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a validly issued permit; 
then a written notice of violation shall be served upon the property owner or the agent of record. 
(b)  Where a person, firm, or corporation has engaged in land disturbing or tree removal activities without having first secured a permit therefor in violation of this article, notices under the provisions of this section may be served upon the person in charge or any person representing the person in charge on the site. All construction and land disturbance activity shall be discontinued until the necessary measures to achieve compliance have been fulfilled. 
(c)  The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the permit and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. 
(d)  If the person, firm, or corporation engaged in land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be subject to citation for violation of this article. 
(e)  Where the activity involves timber harvesting and notice of such has not been provided to the city, no notice of violation is required and any person, firm or corporation involved in such activities may be immediately cited for failure to provide notification. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 9, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 9, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-254. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  Upon notice from the director of the community development department, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped, until such time that the violation has been remedied to the satisfaction of the director of the community development department. Prior to remediation, a plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city arborist. 
(b)  Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  State the specific violations. 
(3)  Be given to the applicant, owner, the authorized agent of either, or the person in charge, or any person representing the person in charge of the activity on the subject property. 
(4)  State the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(5)  Allow only erosion control work to continue while stop work is in effect. 
(c)  Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 10, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 10, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-255. - Modification, revocation, suspension, voidance of permit. 
A land disturbance permit and/or other permits required by this article may be modified, revoked, suspended, or voided by the director of the community development department upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 11, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 11, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-256. - Bonding. 
(a)  The director of the community development department will evaluate all development projects (excluding timber harvesting) requesting property clear cutting. Bonding for timber harvesting activities may be required as provided for in this section. If, upon completion of the site evaluation, the community development department deems it appropriate to allow property clear cutting activities, a bond will be required. The bond will be required by the city as a mechanism to cover any potential cost associated with re-vegetation of the clear-cut property in the event of property abandonment. 
(b)  The city may require persons or firms subject to the timber harvesting notice requirement to deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this subsection, in which case notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the governing authority or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the city against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount specified by the city not exceeding $5,000.00 or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this subsection, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(c)  For activities other than timber harvesting the required bond amount will be 125 percent of the total cost for replanting trees to satisfy the density standards for the project site. A tree replacement cost obtained from a plant nursery will be provided to the director of the community development department with the clear-cut request and the bond amount will be based on the tree replacement cost. The director of the community development department reserves the right to request additional replacement cost if deemed appropriate. The director of the community development department will hold the bond until the project activity, including tree replacement to satisfy the site density requirements, is completed. If, upon issuing the land disturbance permit, the property is clear cut and there are no construction or development activities conducted within six months, the director of the community development department will attempt to contact the property owner (via certified mail) for a project update. Should the property owner not respond within 30 days of receipt of the status request, the bond will be used to re-vegetate the project site. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 12, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 12, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-257. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this article, except for notification of timber harvesting, shall be liable for a fine of up to a maximum $1,000.00 per violation per day. Each calendar day a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. There are no maximum limitations to the accrual of fines. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity that fails to provide a notification of timber harvesting activities shall be liable for a fine of up to a maximum of $500.00 for each tract of land on which the activities occur. 
(c)  Each owner of any property wherein a violation exists shall be jointly and severally responsible for said violations. Each offense will be tried in the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 13, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 13, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-258. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the city arborist relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the director of the community development department for relief or reconsideration. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the director of the department of community development relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the mayor and city council. The appeal shall be made through the director of community development. 
(c)  Appeals shall only be granted for errors of interpretation or where the unique natural features of the site are such that application of these regulations would create an undue hardship to the property owner, and in other instances where an undue hardship is created for the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 14, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 14, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-259. - Notification of timber harvesting activities. 
(a)  Written notice shall be provided to the city community development department by all persons or firms prior to the initiation of any timber harvesting activities within the municipal limits of the city. Notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby and shall be in such form as prescribed by the director of community development, and shall consist of: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(b)  Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile or such other means as approved by the governing authority, or by mail. 
(c)  The city may require persons or firms subject to such notice requirement to deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided in section 14-256. 
(d)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such city upon receipt of the same by the city or its designated agent and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of this subsection and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the city or its designated agent within three business days after such change. 
(e)  Notice requirements shall be applicable to any such timber harvested on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(f)  Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(g)  The limitations on the regulatory authority of counties, municipalities, or other political subdivisions shall apply only to timber harvesting operations which qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, not incidental to development, on tracts which are zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 15, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 14-260. - Best management practices. 
All land development, commercial property management, commercial tree care, utility maintenance, and timber harvesting shall follow the following best management practices: 
(1)  ANSI A300 Guidelines for Tree Care Practices. 
(2)  ANSI Z-133 Tree Work Safety Standards. 
(3)  The Georgia Forestry Commission's Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Timber Harvesting. 
(4)  International Society of Arborculture (ISA). BMPs for Utility Vegetation Management. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-06-178, § 1, added §§ 14-260—14-262, and renumbered former § 14-260 as § 14-263. 
Sec. 14-261. - Tree board. 
(a)  Creation and establishment of a city tree board. There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia, which shall consist of no less than three and no more than seven members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of the members of the tree board members shall be one year. 
(c)  Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the board, when requested by the city council, to study, investigate, council and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(e)  Operation. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-262. - Public trees. 
The care of trees on property owned by the city is the responsibility of the city's department of public works. The department of public works may request the consultation of the tree board concerning the care of city-owned trees. If requested, the tree board will provide to the department of public works with an evaluation of individual trees or a stand of trees, or advice on care for - or removal of - any trees on city-owned property. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-263. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this article, or its accompanying administrative guidelines, be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-22, art. 8, § 15, 2-6-2008; Ord. No. 09-05-50, art. 8, § 16, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-06-178 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
ARTICLE X. - COMMERCIAL CAR WASH WATER RECYCLING 

Sec. 14-281. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this adrticle is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
(b)  Applicability. This article applies to all commercial car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-179 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-282. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, have the meaning defined in this section: 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-179 , § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 14-283. - Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
All new commercial car washes, permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 75 percent of water utilized will be recycled. 
( Ord. No. 18-06-179 , § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Chapter 16 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Creation of the court. 
In accordance with the section 4.01 of the Charter, the city hereby creates the municipal court of the city. The powers and jurisdiction of said Court are described in section 4.04 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-2. - Judge and judge pro-tem. 
(a)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the council shall appoint the municipal court judge by resolution, with compensation to be fixed by the council. 
(b)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the council shall also appoint a judge pro tem by resolution to serve as requested by the chief judge. 
(c)  The chief judge and judge pro tem shall serve a term of four years, but may be removed for cause by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the judicial qualification commission. 
(d)  The chief judge or judge pro tem may only be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 4.02(d) of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-3. - Additional personnel. 
(a)  Clerk of the court. The city manager shall have the authority to hire and fire a municipal court clerk who shall be the administrator of said court. 
(b)  Police. Officers of the city police department or the county police department or county sheriff's department or any other law enforcement officer may execute warrants and other writs in furtherance of the court's jurisdiction and orders. 
(c)  Bailiff. At least one city police department officer or an officer from the county sheriff's department or county police department will serve as a bailiff whenever the municipal court is in session. 
(d)  Solicitor. In accordance with section 3.08 of the Charter, the city attorney may be the prosecuting officer or solicitor in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-4. - Additional support. 
(a)  Indigent defense. The city shall provide indigent defendants with counsel as provided by state law. 
(b)  Translator. The city may provide translation services as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-5. - Court sessions. 
The court shall be in session at least one day per month and other times as determined necessary by the municipal court clerk to keep the court dockets current. The municipal court clerk shall direct staffing of said sessions. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-6. - Court fees. 
(a)  The municipal court chief judge may recommend a schedule of fees to assist the court in its operation and budget. The council must approve any such schedule, but if the council does not act within 30 days of the court's recommendation, the fee schedule will become effective. 
(b)  The council may set city fines for violations of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 1, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 16-7—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS 

Sec. 16-31. - Rules. 
The municipal court chief judge shall adopt specific rules of procedure. No rules shall be inconsistent with the laws of Georgia or the Constitution of the United States. Such rules shall be made available on the city website or by other means determined by the council. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-32. - Contempt of court. 
The court may find persons in contempt of court and punish said persons in accordance with section 4.04(a) of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-33. - Fines. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the court clerk and collected as provided by law. The municipal court shall have the discretion to enter fines consistent with this Code of Ordinances and state and federal law. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations or other offenses as specified by the judge may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged. Those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and other serious offenses, as determined by the municipal court judge, shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-34. - Sentences. 
In addition to any applicable fines, and upon a judgment or plea of guilty or pre-trial diversion, the municipal court chief judge may impose sentence of confinement, compulsory work, or both; commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; place the defendant on probation; or defer the execution of the sentence or any portion thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. The court may punish for violations within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both, except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-35. - Appeals. 
Unless specified elsewhere in this Code or the Charter, all appeals from decisions of the municipal court shall be appealable, by right of certiorari, to the Superior Court of Fulton County under the laws of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 16-36—16-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BAIL 

Sec. 16-59. - General provisions. 
Bail and bond considerations must be consistent with section 4.04 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-60. - Minor traffic offenses. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11, any person cited for a traffic offense shall be released in lieu of bail upon showing his driver's license. This provision does not apply to any charges of driving under the influence or other serious offenses designated by the municipal judge. 
(b)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-61. - Professional bondsmen. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he holds a current business license in the city, is approved by the chief of police, and has fully complied with all other city requirements for bonding companies. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 3, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-62. - Failure or refusal to give bond. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-04, art. 3, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon the property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage or the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner set forth in subsection (d) of this section, or in any of the locations set forth in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any persons who are waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  By accosting another; or 
(2)  By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(e)  Who may press charges. Persons who may press charges under this section include not only the victim of the prohibited solicitation, but also any person who witnesses such conducted, including, but not limited to, police officers, security officers, hotel personnel, and bystanders. Evidence to support conviction for violation of this section may include, but is not limited to, the testimony of such witness, videotape evidence of the violation, and/or other admissible evidence. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-2. - Treasure hunts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Treasure hunts means advertising campaigns conducted for the purpose of promoting the sale of any merchandise, commodity or service of any business or profession conducted for private or corporate gain, whereby some article, thing or token is hidden within the corporate limits of the city and clues as to the locations of such article, thing or token are given by any form of advertising, either by newspaper, radio or television or in any other manner, but shall not include private social parties involving no element of commerce or gain. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or aid and abet in the conducting of any treasure hunt as defined in this section, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 5, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-3. - Moving household goods at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport household goods and furnishings from one place of residence to another between the hours of sunset and sunrise without first having obtained a permit to do so from the police chief. All applications for permits shall be filed more than 24 hours prior to the time of actual moving. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-4. - Residential picketing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Picket or picketing shall refer to the following types of activity: 
(1)  To patrol or station oneself at a residence, bearing some insignia or sign designed to persuade or protest; 
(2)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind; 
(3)  Obstructing passage to or from a residence; or 
(4)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at an individual residence. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or engage in picketing upon, before or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(c)  Any person who is found guilty of violating this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 7, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-5. - False representations to police or any city department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 8, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 8, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-6. - Restriction on outdoor water use. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The mayor and council of the city have determined that as situations arise which require conservation of outdoor water use, as mandated by rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division, the city shall preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city through enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Adoption of restrictions. The city hereby adopts by reference the outdoor water use rules mandated by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division (EPD), from time to time, as the same are modified by the county water system (the EPD/Fulton County Restrictions). A copy of the current EPD/Fulton County Restrictions is incorporated herein, and a current copy of the same as modified shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any violation of the EPD/Fulton County Restrictions in effect from time to time shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. Every city police officer, fire fighter and code enforcement officer shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this section through the issuance of non-criminal or criminal citations. Such officers shall have the authority to enter property for the purpose of inspection for compliance. A record of each citation shall be maintained. If personal contact is made with the violator, the officer shall require immediate compliance. 
(d)  Civil penalties and fines. Any person or entity accused of violating any provision of this section shall, with respect to the first violation, be provided with a written warning. Any person accused of violating any provision of this section for a second time shall be issued a non-criminal citation requiring the payment of a civil penalty to the city in the amount of $250.00. For a third violation of this section, a violator shall be issued a non-criminal citation requiring a payment of a civil penalty of $500.00 to the city. All penalties are due and payable on or before ten days following the date of the citation. 
(e)  Appeals. Any alleged violator may appeal a citation to the city manager within the ten-day period for the payment of the penalty. All such appeals shall be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. If a timely appeal is filed, the penalty shall be stayed until a determination is made by the city manager. If the city manager determines that a violation has not occurred or that a reasonable hardship exists justifying the waiver or reduction of the penalty, the city manager may reduce or waive the penalty. If any penalty is not paid or appealed within ten days of the date of the citation, or paid within three days after the denial of an appeal by the city manager, the violator shall be issued a criminal citation requiring an appearance in municipal court. 
(f)  Criminal penalties and fines. A criminal violation of this section, as delineated in subsection (e) of this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor, and be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 9, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-02-81, art. 6, § 9, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 9, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-7. - Noise. 
(a)  Definitions. All terminology used in this article, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
A-weighting means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
Commercial or business property category means all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performances of service, or for office or clerical work. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA means the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
dBC means the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Impulsive sound means a sound having a duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial or manufacturing property category means any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Institutional property category means any property which is used primarily for public purposes such as city hall or a city park. 
Muffler means a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multifamily dwelling means any building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound that: 
(1)  Endangers the safety or health of any person; 
(2)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
(3)  Endangers personal or real property. 
Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Octave band means all the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine waves components separated by an octave. 
Real property line means the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Residential property category means all property on which people live and sleep or that which is not commercial or industrial. 
Sound level meter (SLM) means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) means twenty (20) multiplied by the logarithm, to the base ten, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
(b)  Sound level limitations. 
(1)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property using the slow response setting unless otherwise noted. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
Table 1 Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property 

 
(2)  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.) limits of table 1 shall be increased by ten dBA. 
(3)  In a multi-family dwelling, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds the weekdays Sunday through Thursday (7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.) and weekends Friday through Saturday (7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m.) limit of fifty-five (55) dBA as measured from the closest neighbor's dwelling. 
(4)  In places of public entertainment having a capacity of 1,000 or more persons, it shall be unlawful to create or permit to be created any noise that exceeds an average of 95 dBC in any ten-minute period from 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. for events commencing on Friday or Saturday. The sound level limit for all other times shall be 55 dBC. The sound shall be measured at a point which is found by traveling a straight line distance from the center of the sound board through the center rear of the facility a distance of 500 feet or to the property line of the facility, whichever is less. The measurement assumes that the sound board is not more than 100 feet from the center stage. The 500-foot measurement shall be reduced one foot for each foot that the sound board is more than 100 feet from center stage. 
(5)  Gunfire between sunset and sunrise within 1,000 feet of an offsite dwelling, with the exception of hunting activities legal in the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 18-7(b): 
a.  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
b.  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if intermittent; 
c.  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted or ten minutes if the sound is intermittent; 
d.  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
e.  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by an accredited and/or State of Georgia licensed and credentialed institution of learning, including, but not limited to band, choir, and orchestral performances; 
f.  Noise that results from the activities of an organized sports league; 
g.  Unamplified bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.; 
h.  Emergency work; 
i.  Fireworks from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. any night, and additionally from 9:00 p.m. to midnight January 1, July 3, July 4, and Dec. 31. On New Year's Eve fireworks may also continue until 1:00 a.m. 
(d)  Restricted uses and activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-7(b) and the exceptions above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
(1)  Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturday or Sunday before the hour of 7:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in section 18-7(b). At all other times, the limits set forth in section 18-7(b) do not apply to non-commercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and year maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. 
(2)  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work, or 
b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in section 18-7(b). 
At all other times, the limits set forth in section 18-7(b) do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. 
(3)  Construction and demolition activity shall not be performed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, unless: 
a.  Such activities are deemed emergency work; or 
b.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in section 18-7(b). 
This provision shall not apply if the chief of police determines that the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration. In such cases, the chief of police may grant a renewable permit for a period not to exceed ten days for this work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Domesticated animals may not make any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if intermittent. 
(5)  The collection of trash or refuse in residential districts is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  No person shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device in such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance at 50 feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(e)  Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
(1)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the impacted site, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this article, noise measurements are measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 
(2)  Measurements shall be taken by public safety officers/code enforcement personnel appropriately trained in the use of a sound level meter. 
(f)  Special variances. 
(1)  The chief of police or the chief's designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this article, to grant special variances. 
(2)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this article shall file an application with the chief of police or the chief's designated representative. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound into compliance with this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on the other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the chief or the chief's representative to persons who frequent the area of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the chief or the chief's representative containing any information to support such individual's claim. 
(3)  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the chief or the chief's designated representative shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances may be required to submit any information the chief or the chief's representative may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the chief or the chief's representative shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. 
(4)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this article regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
(5)  Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances. 
(6)  The chief of police or the chief's designated representative may issue guidelines approved by city council defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance. 
(7)  Enforcement procedures; miscellaneous. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a city ordinance citation. In addition to issuing a fine, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. 
b.  Whenever any city resident shall complain to the police department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or howls, is being kept by any person in the city, a city law enforcement officer, prior to the issuance of a citation, shall notify the owner of such dog or cat that a complaint has been received. If the notice given to the owner alleged to be keeping a dog or a cat in violation of this article is ineffective, then the police shall issue a formal warning to the owner of such dog or cat that the owner shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, yelping or crying. If the warning given to the owner is ineffective, a citation shall be issued to the owner of the dog or cat. 
c.  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other law. 
(Ord. No. 10-05-71, art. 6, § 10, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 10, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 15-12-147, 12-1-2015; Ord. No. 17-09-173 , 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 18-8. - Littering and dumping. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, wood, paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, and glass containers or packaging, broken glass, cigarette butts, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not hazardous waste as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed for such use; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or is acting under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(c)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the shifting, dropping, or depositing of any materials from such load onto the roadway or adjacent property. 
(d)  For purposes of setting fines and penalties for violation of this chapter, the term "littering" means any generation of depositing of litter of less than one cubic foot in volume; the term "dumping" means any generation of depositing of litter of over one cubic foot in volume. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-68, art. 6, § 11, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 11, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-9. - Obstruction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully hinder or obstruct any law enforcement officer, fire fighter, or emergency medical technician in the lawful discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-68, art. 6, § 12, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 12, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-10. - Possession of controlled substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his direct control any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-68, art. 6, § 13, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 13, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-11. - Public garbage and recycling facilities. 
At any public garbage or recycling facility, the operator of the facility shall post or cause to be posted signs designating the type of materials to be deposited in each container and the hours of operation for the facility. There shall be at least one sign within ten feet of each container. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface such signs or for any person to place any improper materials in a container or to leave any materials on or around a container. 
(Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 14, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-12—18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 18-41. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, to the disturbance of any other person, to commit any act of public indecency, quarrel or fight, or use obscene, vulgar or profane language within the city, or to otherwise act in a disorderly manner or behave in any way contrary to public peace or morality within the city. 
(b)  Disorderly conduct shall be deemed to consist of, but not be limited to, the following specific acts or any one of them: 
(1)  No person shall endanger or interfere with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct. 
(2)  No person shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(3)  No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(4)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place by any law enforcement officer. 
(5)  No person shall obstruct, halt or impede the flow of vehicles or pedestrians to or from private property or buildings or other structures abutting on public streets, sidewalks or other public places. 
(6)  No person shall direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(7)  No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of gaming. 
(8)  No person shall be in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing, or to aid or abet any person doing so. 
(9)  No person shall throw bottles, sticks, paper, cans, glass, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property except into receptacles or containers designed to hold refuse for future collection and retrieval. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-68, art. 1, § 1, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-42. - Offenses against public morals. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of distributing obscene material when he sells, lends, rents, leases, gives, advertises, publishes, exhibits, or otherwise disseminates to any person any obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature thereof, or offers to do so, or possesses such material with the intent to do so, provided that the word 'knowing,' as used in this section, shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter; and a person has constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material; provided, however, that the character and reputation of the individual charged with an offense under this law, and, if a commercial dissemination of obscene material is involved, the character and reputation of the business establishment involved may be placed in evidence by the defendant on the question of intent to violate this law. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. 
(b)  Material is obscene if: 
(1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; 
(2)  The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and 
(3)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined in this subsection (b)(3): 
a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
b.  Acts of masturbation; 
c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
(c)  Any device designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs is obscene material under this section. 
(d)  Material not otherwise obscene may be obscene under this section if the distribution thereof, the offer to do so, or the possession with the intent to do so is a commercial exploitation of erotica solely for the sake of their prurient appeal. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense under this section that selling, lending, renting, leasing, giving, advertising, publishing, exhibiting, or otherwise disseminating the material was restricted to: 
(1)  A person associated with an institution of higher learning, either as a member of the faculty or a matriculated student, teaching or pursuing a course of study related to such material; or 
(2)  A person whose receipt of such material was authorized in writing by a licensed medical practitioner or psychiatrist. 
(f)  A person who commits the offense of distributing obscene material shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-43. - Alcohol related offenses. 
(a)  Alcohol consumption near package stores. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverage within 100 feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. 
(b)  Drinking in public. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while on any streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas or other open areas operated and controlled by the city, or while in or on the grounds of any MARTA station. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while in any city park except during permitted festivals or at other licensed locations within such parks. 
(2)  A licensee may prepare and serve alcoholic beverages to be consumed within an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk cafe. Open containers of alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into or out of outdoor dining areas by the licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(c)  Disorderly while under the influence. 
(1)  Acts constituting violation. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be disorderly while under the influence on the streets sidewalks or other public places. The following acts are declared to be in violation of this section: 
a.  Any person who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk to himself, to others or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
b.  Any person who shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
c.  Any person who, without provocation, uses to or of another, in such person's presence fighting words, or who shall panhandle under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
d.  Any person who shall act in a tumultuous manner toward another so as to endanger the life limb, health or property of another while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
e.  Any person who shall lie down or otherwise obstruct, block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street, or entrance or exit to any public way, house of worship, business, public hall, theater, public conveyance or other public place and who shall refuse to remove themselves when ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
f.  Any person who shall act in a boisterous, turbulent, or agitated manner, or who shall use profane, vulgar, loud or unbecoming language while under the influence of alcohol or drugs while on the city streets sidewalks, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Duty of peace officer. Any peace officer, in accordance with standards set out in standard operating procedures promulgated by the police chief, may take or send an individual under the influence of alcohol or drugs to such person's home or to a treatment facility in lieu of incarcerating such person for violations of this section or when such person is unresponsive to the officer's communications. Any peace officer so acting shall be considered as carrying out such peace officer's official duty. The standard operating procedures shall set out the circumstances under which a peace officer may send an individual home or to a treatment facility without formally rendering charges against a person. 
(d)  Furnishing to, purchasing of, or possession by person under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages. 
(1)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
a.  No person directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
b.  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages; 
c.  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
d.  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; 
e.  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverages; or 
f.  No person shall keep or maintain a place where persons under 21 years of age are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (d)(1)a, b and d of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcohol beverages for consumption: 
a.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
b.  At a religious ceremony. 
(3)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (d)(1)a, b and d of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(4)  The prohibition contained in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(5)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
a.  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishments; 
b.  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
c.  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(6)  Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding, against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used as an admission in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person under 21 years of age. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify, amend or supersede O.C.G.A title 15, chapter 11 (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.). 
(8)  Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 180 days, or both; except that any person convicted of violating subsection (d)(1)b of this section shall be punished by not more than 30 days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00, or both. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any person charged with a second or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature in the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(9)  Whenever any person who has not been previously convicted or any offense under this section or under any other law of the United States or this or any other state relating to alcoholic beverages pleads guilty to or is found guilty of a violation of subsection (d)(1)b or c of this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of such person, may defer further proceedings and place such person on probation upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the court may require. The terms of probation shall preferably be such as require the person to undergo a comprehensive rehabilitation program, including, if necessary, medical treatment, not to exceed three years, designed to acquaint such person with the ill effects of alcohol abuse and to provide such person with knowledge of the gains and benefits which can be achieved by being a good member of society. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed accordingly. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge such person and dismiss the proceedings against such person. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without court adjudication of guilt and shall not be deemed a conviction for purposes of this subsection or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection may occur only once with respect to any person. 
(10)  Unless the officer has reasonable cause to believe such person is intoxicated, a law enforcement officer may arrest by issuance of a citation a person accused of violating only subsection (d)(1)b of this section. The citation shall enumerate the specific charges against the person and either the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges or a notation that the person will be later notified of the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges. If the person charged shall fail to appear as required, the judge, having jurisdiction of the offense may issue a warrant or other order directing the apprehension of such person and commanding that such person be brought before the court to answer the charges contained within the citation and the charge of such person's failure to appear as required. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to invalidate an otherwise valid arrest by citation of a person who is intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-44. - Vandalism. 
(a)  Public property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any public property or park in the city. 
(2)  No person shall spit on the floors, walls, or other parts of any public building in the city. 
(b)  Private property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  This subsection shall not be construed as affecting any remedy the private property owner may have at law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-45. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and encourages similar acts of vandalism. Without prompt removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to live and work. 
(2)  The council members of the city in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare further find and declare that to be truly effective in the deterrence, eradication, and removal of graffiti, it is necessary to implement a comprehensive anti-graffiti ordinance. 
(b)  Definition. The term "graffiti" means the defacing, altering, modifying, changing, drawing, damaging, or destroying by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substances on public and/or private buildings, structures, and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, alter, modify, change, draw, damage, or destroy by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye, or any other similar substance on public and/or private buildings, structures and places, an inscription, slogan, drawing, or modification, or otherwise damage private or public property in contradiction of other city ordinances, by or through the application of graffiti as defined herein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise being in control of any real property within the city to maintain, permit, or allow any graffiti to be placed upon any structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property after notice, in writing, has been given to such person in control of said property. 
(d)  Graffiti notice of removal. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or utility owner, or acting as a manager, tenant, or agent for the owner of the property, to permit the application of or fail to remove graffiti within ten business days after written notice is given. 
(e)  Graffiti notice procedure. 
(1)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti or other unsightly conditions on any property, including structures or improvements within the city, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given, written notice to the property owner, and/or owner's agent, tenant, or manager to remove such graffiti or other unsightly condition therefrom. 
(2)  The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
a.  By personal service or registered or certified mail addressed to the owner or the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. Such notice shall allow ten days from the date of notice for removal of identified graffiti. 
b.  In the event that the city has attempted to notify the proper person under subsection (e)(2)a of this section and is unable to do so, then the city is authorized to post the above notice on the main entrance of the building. 
(3)  For the purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property. In addition, the owner may notify the city that the tenant, pursuant to a written lease, has control of the property or has control of that portion of the building which is the subject matter of this section and, in the event the city receives such notice, the city shall notify the tenant of the notice of removal as provided in this section and proceed against the tenant and not the owner; provided, however, as to any violation of this section in existence on or before January 1, 2008, any notice of removal shall give 60 days for the removal thereof. 
(f)  Accepted graffiti removal products. 
(1)  The planning and zoning department shall maintain a list of substances designated as acceptable products to remove specific types of graffiti from specific surfaces (unpainted brick, concrete, stone, etc.). This list shall include detailed information on the appropriate use of such designated substances. Appropriate use of said substances by property owners shall constitute compliance with the requirement to remove graffiti contained therein. 
(2)  Uses of any of these items or any other items are at the risk of the user. The city does not recommend the products. Use may discolor or damage the finish of the surface the products are used on. 
(g)  City cost declared lien. If the person, agent, firm, manager, or owner of the property fails to remove the graffiti by the end of the ten-day notification period, the city manager may cause the graffiti to be removed and charge to the property owner the expenses incurred. Upon the completion of removal by the city, the city shall provide the proper party written notice consistent with subsections (d) and (e) of this section of the total cost of removal and shall give the proper party 30 days to pay the total cost incurred by the city. If the expenses of the removal remain unpaid for a period of 60 days, the city may place a lien against the property upon which said nuisance existed and from which the graffiti was removed. 
(h)  Graffiti penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating this section shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-4. The municipal court may suspend or probate a portion or all of its sentence upon such conditions, to include, but not be limited to, the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 5, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-46. - Tampering with utilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb, tamper with, or remove any guy wires from any electric power pole, utility pole, or telephone pole located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-47. - Fines and punishment. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 1, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 1, § 7, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-48—18-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 18-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Burglar alarm system means any assembly of equipment or device, whether mechanical or electrical, arranged or designed to signal by any means the occurrence of an illegal entry into the premises or any other activity requiring urgent police attention and to which the police department may reasonably be expected to respond; provided, however, that this definition does not include alarm systems installed exclusively for the purpose of signaling an ongoing robbery, fire or medical emergency, and does not include any alarm system installed in a motor vehicle. 
Burglar alarm user means the person or other entity which owns, leases, rents, manages, possesses, or has primary control over the premises in which a burglar alarm system is installed or maintained. 
Chief of police means the chief of the county police, county sheriff or the chief of police of the city police department, if such department is established, or his designee. 
False alarm means the activation of a signal from a burglar or fire alarm system which elicits a response from the police or fire and rescue department when there is in fact no emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity necessitating such a response. This definition includes, without being limited to, any burglar alarm system signal activated as a result of weather, negligence, accident, mechanical failure, electrical failure, electrical surge, signals activated intentionally in non-emergency situations, and signals activated where the actual cause of such activation is unknown. There is a rebuttable presumption that an activated burglar or fire alarm system signal is a false alarm if the responding personnel, after following normal procedures in their response and investigation, find no evidence of unauthorized entry, criminal activity or other emergency. An activated alarm system signal shall not be considered a false alarm if: 
(1)  The police or fire and rescue department is notified to cancel its response by the alarm user or the alarm user's monitoring agent prior to the time emergency personnel arrive at the premises; 
(2)  The burglar or fire alarm system signal was intentionally activated by an individual based upon a reasonable belief that an emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity requiring immediate response existed; 
(3)  The burglar or fire alarm system signal was activated by lightening or other act of nature resulting in an electrical surge which causes physical damage to the alarm system and which damage is evidenced by the written report of a licensed alarm system contractor who conducted an inspection of the system at the premises and personally observed such physical damage. 
Fire alarm means any assembly of equipment or device, whether mechanical or electrical, arranged or designed to signal by any means the occurrence of a fire at the premises. 
Police department means the county police department, county sheriff or city police department, if such department is established. 
Premises means the building or structure or any portion of a building or structure in which there is installed or maintained a burglar alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 1, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-69. - Purpose and intent. 
Based on the experiences of surrounding municipalities and communities and their law enforcement officers, the council finds that emergency response to false alarms creates additional risks to public safety by diverting limited public safety resources away from both real emergencies and normal patrol activities intended and designed to prevent criminal acts. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to promote public safety by making burglar and fire alarm users in the city directly responsible for preventing false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-70. - Registration required. 
(a)  No later than five business days following the installation of any burglar or fire alarm system, the alarm user shall provide the following information to the chief of police: 
(1)  The complete name, address, and phone number of the alarm user; 
(2)  The names of all persons authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system signal as well as all phone numbers at which such persons can be reached; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the alarm user's monitoring agent, if any; and 
(4)  If known, the name and telephone number of the person or entity which installed the alarm system. 
(b)  Any changes in the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section must be reported to the chief of police within five business days. Burglar or fire alarm users utilizing alarm systems installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall provide the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section to the chief of police no later than 60 days following such effective date, unless sooner requested in writing by the chief of police. 
(c)  The registration requirements of this subsection shall not apply where the alarm system is installed in premises used exclusively for residential purposes; provided, however, upon the occurrence of the third false alarm within any calendar year at any such premises used exclusively for residential purposes, the chief of police is authorized to require in writing that the alarm user comply with the registration requirements within five business days. 
(d)  All alarm systems installed before incorporation of the city shall be registered with the chief of police within six months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The city may authorize the city manager to obtain the registration information from the police chief of the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-71. - Deactivation mechanism required. 
No burglar or fire alarm system installed after the effective date of this article shall be used unless such system is equipped with a mechanism or device that automatically deactivates the alarm system signal no later than 30 minutes after activation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-72. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
The chief of police shall receive and maintain all information required to implement the terms of this article and shall be responsible for its enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the issuance of a citation and prosecution in the city municipal court, or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 4, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 5, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-73. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any burglar or fire alarm user to cause, allow or permit three or more false alarms in any calendar year. It shall also be a violation of this article for any burglar or fire alarm user to fail or otherwise refuse to comply with the registration or equipment requirements set forth in sections 18-70 and 18-71. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or false request for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 5, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-74. - Penalties. 
Upon conviction, violations of this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the third and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any 12-month period, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of $50.00; provided, however, that no burglar alarm user shall be assessed fines in excess of $200.00 for false alarms that occur at the same premises in any 24-hour period. 
(2)  For all other violations of this article, not including false alarms, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of $100.00 and, in addition thereto, the violator may be enjoined by the municipal court judge from continuing the violation. 
(3)  Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)  False alarms shall not be counted for purposes of assessing the penalties provided for in subsection (a) of this section so long as such false alarms occur within ten days following the installation of the burglar or fire alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 2, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-83, art. 2, § 6, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 2, § 7, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-75—18-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 18-92. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-93. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-94. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable code means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the city. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to be the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority office, or any office who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-95. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint or designate the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, building inspector, and their designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, or order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 39a of title 41, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of this filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem tax, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-96. - Determination by public officer that, under existing ordinances, dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 5, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-97. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided; however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officer, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-98. - Service of complaints and other filings. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided above on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 3, § 7, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 3, § 7, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-99—18-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANIMALS 

Sec. 18-125. - Cruel treatment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animals, any substance that is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and unjustifiably kill or injure any domestic animal other than livestock maintained for food purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 4, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 4, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-126. - Disposal of deceased animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to the person to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the animal to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 4, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 4, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-127. - Removal of canine fecal matter. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control, or custody of any dog not to remove any feces left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot, public park, or other public area or public property. 
(b)  Dog waste shall be immediately removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(c)  Each and every violation of this section shall be punishable to the extent provided by section 1-4. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control, or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 4, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 4, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-128—18-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - URBAN CAMPING PROHIBITED 

Sec. 18-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camp means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Public park means and includes all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street means and includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. The term "storing personal property" does not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-154. - Public parks. 
It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined above, owned by the city, other than in designated campgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-155. - Public streets. 
It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street, as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-156. - Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. 
It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 4, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-157. - Warning. 
No person may be arrested for violating this article until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 5, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-158. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 5, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 5, § 6, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-159—18-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES RELATED TO SCHOOLS 

Sec. 18-185. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly-enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-186. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 18-187. - Creating a disturbance at schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities or other activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-09, art. 6, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 12-11-111, art. 6, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 18-188—18-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR BURNING 

Sec. 18-211. - Permissible fires. 
(a)  All burning must occur during daylight hours and no later than one hour after sunset unless approved by permit issued by the office of the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Subject to the requirements of this article, small (camping or cooking) fires no larger than three feet by three feet wide and three feet high created for the sole and visibly obvious purposes of cooking or heating are allowed year-round unless otherwise prohibited by ordinance, state law or regulation, or by federal law or regulation. 
(c)  Burning of hand-piled vegetation is permitted when all requirements as follows are met: 
(1)  The activity occurs during times of year allowed by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (typically, a burn ban is in effect from May 1 through September 30); 
(2)  The activity has been approved (daily) by the Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department; 
(3)  The burn materials are not piled larger than ten feet by ten feet wide and no higher than ten feet; 
(4)  The activity occurs between hours of 8:00 a.m. and no later than one hour after sunset. The fire shall be considered "extinguished" when no smoldering or hot coals remain; 
(5)  The fire is attended at all times by an adult; 
(6)  A means for extinguishment including either a positive water source, farm implements or grading equipment is sufficiently close for immediate extinguishment of the fire; and 
(7)  The burn areas or materials are not located within 50 feet from all manmade structures including buildings, fences, electrical utilities and vehicles. 
(d)  The burning of vegetative debris resulting from the use of commercial equipment clearing land for residential or commercial construction may occur only when using an air curtain destructor (ACD pit and blower) that is used in accordance with operational criteria defined by the Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Permitting and inspection must be undertaken with the office of the fire chief prior to operation. 
(e)  Except as otherwise prohibited under this article or by federal or state laws or regulations, burning of existing agricultural acreage for the improvement or continuation of production of a harvested crop is allowed year-round under the provisions defined by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and must be pre-approved and permitted through the local district offices of Georgia Forestry and by the Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department. 
(f)  "Bonfires" for special events hosted by a school, civic organization, special interest group, religious organization, or other may be permitted by the fire chief after inspection of the site and a thorough review of safety practices. There is no charge for a bonfire permit. 
(g)  The Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department must be contacted each day burning activity is to occur prior to commencing any outdoor burning. 
( Ord. No. 17-06-169 , § 1, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 18-212. - Prohibited fire practices. 
The following practices are prohibited: 
(1)  Use of petroleum-derived accelerants such as gasoline, diesel, kerosene, motor oil, etc. for the purpose of initiating fire or increasing fire volume; 
(2)  Burning of tires, rubber, metals, plastics, wire coatings, insulation and asbestos; 
(3)  Burning of furniture, mattresses, clothing or any items containing synthetic manufactured materials; 
(4)  Burning of construction materials on commercial or residential construction sites; 
(5)  Burning of chemicals, paints, solvents, poisons or other hazardous liquids; 
(6)  Burning of biological wastes including any item derived from or for the medical care of persons and animals; 
(7)  Burning of tissue, bodily fluids or feces of persons or animals; and 
(8)  Burning of waste or garbage from households or businesses, whether burned in barrels, piles, burn pits or otherwise. 
( Ord. No. 17-06-169 , § 2, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 18-213. - Permits. 
(a)  All persons wanting to start and use on outdoor fire in the city limits shall first obtain a permit issued by the office of the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Permits are valid for one calendar day unless otherwise specified within a permit issued by the office of the fire chief or his designee. There is no charge for obtaining a permit to burn vegetative debris at a residence. 
(c)  Applicants for a permit shall provide the following through a face-to-face or phone call conversation with on-duty personnel at the Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department for each day a fire is to be used (a phone recorded message is not sufficient): 
(1)  The names of person(s) responsible for the burning activity; 
(2)  The address of the location of the requested fire; 
(3)  The type of burning requested (residential, commercial, etc.) 
(4)  An estimation of amount of acreage to be burned, if applicable; and 
(5)  A description and implementation of safe practices for burning vegetation, organic debris and acreage. 
(d)  Daily permits may be denied for the following reasons: 
(1)  Warnings or bans enacted by federal, state or regional regulatory entities; 
(2)  Current or forecast weather conditions; 
(3)  History of activities or offenses by person(s) requesting the permit; 
(4)  Inadequate proof of, or application of, safe practices as defined in this article; and 
(5)  Safety concerns determined by the chief of the Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department or, in his absence, the highest ranking on-duty employee of the Chattahoochee Hills Fire Rescue Department. 
(e)  A "commercial burn" permit fee for is established by the City of Chattahoochee Hills. Consult the current adopted "fee schedule" for applicable fee amounts. 
( Ord. No. 17-06-169 , § 3, 6-6-2017) 
Editor's note— Fee schedule as referenced above has not been set out, but may be inspected at the city office. 
Sec. 18-214. - Right to require extinguishment of fires. 
The highest ranking on-duty fire rescue department employee and highest ranking on-duty police department employee and the chiefs of the respective departments may require a fire be extinguished when the fire, resulting smoke or related activities are deemed by such person to be a nuisance or if smoke is creating a health hazard or when smoke reduces visibility on roadways. 
( Ord. No. 17-06-169 , § 4, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 18-215. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Failure to abide by this article may result in a citation to the person(s) listed on the permit and any person who violates the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Any person suspected of deliberately or accidentally setting a fire that leads to the destruction of personal property or causes an otherwise preventable deployment of fire resources may be issued a citation. 
( Ord. No. 17-06-169 , § 5, 6-6-2017) 
Chapter 20 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-19. - Hours of park operation posted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be within the bounds of any city park at any time other than daylight hours; provided, however, that this prohibition will not apply to any persons engaged in any organized activity that has been permitted by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to enter or leave any park except through established entrances or exits and within established time periods. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to gain or attempt to gain admittance to any park or facility in any park where a charge is made, without paying that charge. 
(d)  No persons shall congregate or gather within 150 yards of any entrance to a designated park amphitheater during the hours when paid performances are being given in the amphitheater, unless each such person shall: 
(1)  Hold a valid ticket for the performances being given on such night, or are in the process of purchasing a ticket for the performance; 
(2)  Be delivering goods or services to the amphitheater or to persons holding valid tickets for such performance; 
(3)  Be dropping off or picking up passengers who hold valid tickets for such performance; or 
(4)  Be situated on private property of which such person is the lawful occupant, family member of such lawful occupant or the expressly invited guest of such lawful occupant. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-69, art. 1, § 1, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 1, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 1, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 20-20. - Public conduct in parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess and/or consume any alcoholic beverage, or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage within any public park and/or within any building under the supervision of the parks director unless such usage is expressly permitted by signage or published rules of the particular park or recreation building and approved by the city council or by permit granted by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or under his direct control any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 on any city property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain a nuisance or disturbance or engage in any disorderly conduct as defined in section 18-41, which, because of noise, use of vile language or danger to the health, safety or morals of the citizens of the city or users of a city park, interferes with the use and enjoyment of a park. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or injure any public property, real or personal, belonging to, owned by, leased to or used by the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard the notices, prohibitions or directions on any park sign. 
(f)  Except as otherwise permitted in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or display any commercial sign or any advertisement on city property other than political signs or advertisements which may be displayed but which shall not be affixed in any manner to city property. This rule shall not apply to any signs or advertisements regarding any city-sponsored or city-authorized program, festival, or other event that occurs in the park. Signs or advertisements regarding city-sponsored or city-authorized programs, festivals or other events may be placed or displayed only with written permission by the director of parks and recreation or his designee, and only at the locations and during the times authorized in writing by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(g)  No sign, banner, or any other item shall be hung from a tree located in the park unless it is hung in a manner that does not puncture, constrict, or otherwise damage the tree. Any rope, line, or other apparatus used to hang items from trees shall be removed entirely before departure from the park or the end of the event. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, or through reckless behavior, destroy or damage the lawn, plants, walls, road or other infrastructure of a park. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a playscape, park bench, picnic table, restroom or facilities for other than its intended use and/or purpose. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play, practice or otherwise participate in any game, sport or other recreational activity that is destructive to the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any area for changing clothing, other than an area designated for that purpose. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive stakes, posts, poles or any other device or dig holes for the purpose of securing stakes, posts, poles or any other device for any reason, including to erect a tent, stage or other structure, except by permit issued by the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, erect, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in and/or erect any inflatable amusements, amusements requiring water, or any amusements requiring an independent power source, except during permitted special events and festivals. This rule shall not apply to lakes or rivers. For purposes of this subsection, inflatable amusements shall not include balls or balloons, and amusements requiring water shall not include water pistols. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a tent or canopy with a finished dimension greater than 12 feet by 12 feet, or be in possession of an erected tent or canopy with the same dimensions, without receiving the written permission of the director of parks and recreation or his designee, as well as all other applicable permits required by the city. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, carry, possess, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in, carry or possess, glass containers except for authorized vendors who shall retain and remove from the park all glass containers utilized in their activities. This rule shall not apply to designated park amphitheater areas when performances are being given therein. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, shoot, maim or kill any animal or wildlife, or attempt to do any of the above to any animal or wildlife within any of the city parks without the written permission of the city council, unless threatened with bodily injury or death, except as may be permitted by state law. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal in a park. All pets brought into a park must be on a leash or tether. Persons with pets must clean up after the pet. 
(r)  All horses that are brought to a city park must have proof of a current negative Coggins Test. Any out-of-state transport of horses into the city is required to have a veterinarian's health certificate. 
(s)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any river, stream, spring, branch, pond, fountain or other water owned by or leased to the city within a park facility. No person shall climb or lie upon any tree, shrub, fence, statue, monument or fountain. 
(t)  Littering or dumping of household trash or other refuse is prohibited on park property. It is prohibited to dispose of charcoal anywhere inside of a park other than in city-provided receptacles that are clearly marked for charcoal disposal. 
(u)  Campfires are prohibited on park property except in designated, permitted areas. All campfires in the parks must receive permission from the director of parks and recreation or his designee, who shall maintain a registry of parties receiving such permission and shall operate under the guidance of the city fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-69, art. 1, § 2, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 1, § 2, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 1, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 20-21. - Parks activities. 
Except by special permit granted by the director of parks and recreation or his designee, the following activities are prohibited in the parks: 
(1)  Tents or canopies outside marked primitive camping areas. All tents or canopies must have a finished dimension less than 12 feet by 12 feet. 
(2)  Moonwalks, dunk tanks, or any equipment that calls for independent power. 
(3)  All games and activities that could damage any lawns. 
(4)  Amplified music. When amplified music is permitted, it shall cease by 10:30 p.m. and shall comply with section 18-7, governing noise and public nuisances. 
(5)  Sale of food or other items. 
(6)  Filming or photographing for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 1, § 3, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 1, § 3, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 20-22. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park of the city, except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to city employees whose duties require them to drive park maintenance equipment over the park, contractors or volunteers with explicit permission from the director of parks and recreation or the director of public works, or park users who receive permission from the director of parks and recreation or his designee for the purposes of loading or unloading only. 
(b)  The parking of vehicles by users of a park shall be allowed in approved parking areas in the public parks of the city, as long as such parking is in accordance with traffic laws, rules and regulations of the parks department, and provided the occupants of automobiles do not create a disturbance or violate any law or ordinance of the city or the state. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on any of the drives, avenues or parking lots in any public park outside the posted hours of park operations, except for activities permitted by the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon any road within any of the city parks to exceed the speed of 15 miles per hour, with the exception of Cochran Mill Road where the posted speed limit shall prevail. 
(e)  Any person who shall interfere with the use of a park or violate any ordinance of the city, park rules or regulations, or state act may be required to immediately leave the park by any authorized park employee, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer, and thereafter such offender shall not return to the park or use park facilities for a period of 24 hours. 
(f)  The parks commission shall have the authority to recommend to council amendments and/or changes to the rules, regulations and procedures relating to parks and parks-related matters. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group to make a change to any city's park or park property without the written permission of the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 1, § 4, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 1, § 4, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 20-23. - Enforcement. 
The police department and/or city code enforcement shall have jurisdiction to enforce municipal and state laws in city parks. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-69, art. 1, § 3, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 2, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 2, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 20-24. - Penalty. 
Violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in the municipal court and, in addition to the penalties therein imposed, a report of each conviction under this section shall be given to the director of the parks and recreation department of the city, who shall have the power, after taking all facts and circumstances into consideration, to suspend use of the facilities of the parks and recreation department for a period not to exceed one year for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-03-69, art. 1, § 4, 3-30-2010; Ord. No. 10-12-78, art. 2, § 2, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 12-11-110, art. 2, § 2, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 20-25—20-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING AT COCHRAN MILL PARK AND HUTCHESON FERRY PARK 

Sec. 20-52. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Cochran Mill and Hutcheson Ferry Parking Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 20-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle has the same definition as proscribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(33); 
School trip means off-campus travel by students of a particular school, sanctioned by that school, to Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park as part of an educational class. 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 2, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 20-54. - Applicability. 
(a)  The terms of this article shall apply to any motor vehicle which is unattended in the parking lot of Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle subject to this article must display a parking pass at all times. 
(c)  Motor vehicles that are only involved in active loading or unloading are exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 3, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 20-55. - Types of parking passes. 
(a)  Resident passes. These are annual passes provided to residents of the city free of charge. Passes may only be used between sunup and sundown except at city-sanctioned events, city-approved events or in conjunction with city-permitted activities during which these time restrictions shall not apply. A resident may request passes for any and all motor vehicles registered to that resident. These passes shall be active from the date received until the end of the calendar year in which they are issued. 
(b)  Annual passes. These are passes that are active from the purchase date until the end of the calendar year in which they are purchased. Passes may only be used between sunup and sundown except at city-sanctioned events, city-approved events or in conjunction with city-permitted activities during which these time restrictions shall not apply. The license plate of the motor vehicle shall be recorded and the annual pass shall only be displayed in that motor vehicle. These passes shall not be pro-rated based on the date of purchase. 
(1)  For motor vehicles with three or more axles or for motor vehicles with anything in tow, annual passes shall cost $35.00. 
(2)  For all other motor vehicles, annual passes shall cost $25.00. 
(c)  Daily passes. These are passes that are active only for the date indicated on the pass and are only valid between sunup and sundown on that date except at city-sanctioned events, city-approved events or in conjunction with city-permitted activities during which these time restrictions shall not apply. 
(1)  For motor vehicles with three or more axles or for motor vehicles with anything in tow, daily passes shall cost $10.00. 
(2)  For all other motor vehicles, daily passes shall cost $5.00. 
(d)  School trip passes. These are passes that are active only for the date indicate on the pass and are only valid between sunup and sundown on that date except at city-sanctioned events, city-approved events or in conjunction with city-permitted activities during which these time restrictions shall not apply. These passes are provided free of charge to an educational facility and are to be used for motor vehicles transporting students to and from Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park for a school trip. 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 4, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 20-56. - Obtaining parking passes. 
(a)  Resident passes and annual passes may be obtained at city hall during regular business hours. 
(b)  Daily passes may be obtained at Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park on the day the pass is to be used. 
(c)  School trip passes may be obtained at city hall during regular business hours or at other locations selected by the city. 
(d)  Groups renting the pavilion or field at Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park will be provided ten daily passes free of charge. 
(e)  If someone purchases a $25.00 annual pass, they may upgrade to the $35.00 annual pass at any time by bringing the $25.00 annual pass and $10.00 to city hall during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 5, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 20-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city police department shall enforce compliance with this article. Additionally, at least one video camera and a sign with the wording "For Your Safety, Park Monitored by Police" may be installed at each park. 
(b)  Failure to display the appropriate parking pass shall result in a fine of $50.00. No motor vehicle may be cited for failure to display the appropriate parking pass more than one time each day. Failure to display the appropriate parking pass includes failure to display any parking pass. 
(c)  Failure to leave the parking lot of Cochran Mill Park or Hutcheson Ferry Park within one hour of sundown or arrival more than one hour prior to sunup, except at city-sanctioned events, city-approved events or in conjunction with city-permitted activities during which these time restrictions shall not apply, shall result in a fine of $50.00. No motor vehicle may be cited for this offense more than one time per sundown-to-sunup period. 
(Ord. No. 13-03-113, art. 3, § 6, 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 16-06-154, § 1, 6-7-2016) 
Chapter 22 - SIGNS 

Sec. 22-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "City of Chattahoochee Hills Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-2. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. This chapter was enacted with the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages through signs; 
(2)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; 
(3)  To promote economic development; 
(4)  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety as it may be affected by distracting signs; 
(5)  To prevent the destruction of the natural beauty and environment of the city; 
(6)  To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(7)  To restrict the continued existence of abandoned or nonconforming signs unless in compliance with the terms of this chapter and to eliminate, over time, all nonconforming signs; 
(8)  To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards; and 
(9)  To make it easier, quicker, and more economically efficient to apply for a sign permit. 
(b)  Findings. 
(1)  The city finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(2)  The city further finds that the regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in thoroughfares, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing community compatible with its rural setting, to protect the natural environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the city's citizens. 
(3)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as thoroughfare signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, the city's wayfinding program is a tool developed and maintained to control the visual appearance of public signage in order to safely communicate services and locations available to the traveling public. With the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The city council finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from thoroughfare excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(4)  The city further finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the bulk of the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-3. - Incorporation of zoning by reference. 
The city has adopted a zoning ordinance and an official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in chapter 35, zoning, shall be given the meanings set forth in chapter 35. 
Abandoned sign means any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt, and for which no person accepts maintenance responsibility. 
Animated sign means any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Applicable wall area means the wall on which a wall sign is attached including all walls and windows that have the same thoroughfare or pedestrian orientation. All open air spaces shall be excluded from the applicable wall area. 
Audible sign means any sign which emits a sound which is audible or emits a signal which can be converted into audible sounds, whether by radio or other means. 
Awning/canopy sign means any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Banner means a sign other than a flag with or without characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Billboard means a freestanding sign with an area of more than 72 square feet. 
Blade sign means a sign attached to a wall on one side and projecting out from the wall, with sign faces perpendicular to the wall. 
Changeable copy sign means any sign that incorporates changing lights, lettering, or images to form a sign message or messages, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. 
Commercial , for the purpose of this chapter, commercial uses do not include home occupations or temporary/vacation rentals. 
Directory sign means a single sign for multiple businesses, offices, professionals, industries, or other entities located within a planned center. 
Fall zone means an area equal to 133 percent of the height of the structure in every direction. 
Flag mans any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization or used to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support with a base of a width not less than the width of the sign face. The sign may be externally illuminated. 
Height, sign, means the elevation measured from grade level adjoining a sign to the highest point on the sign; except that when measuring a free-standing sign, any part of which is located below the centerline of an adjoining thoroughfare, said sign shall be measured from the elevation of the centerline of the thoroughfare to the highest point on the sign. 
Illuminance means the quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in footcandles. 
Average illuminance means the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. 
Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface. 
Maximum illuminance means the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Minimum illuminance means the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. 
Illuminance levels. Illuminance levels and footcandles noted in this chapter mean the maintained illuminance levels, the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. 
Illuminated sign, external, means a sign illuminated by an external light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes or alternates. 
Illuminated sign, internal, means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates. 
Illumination. 
Direct illumination means illumination that is projected from within a sign, building, or similar structure. 
Indirect illumination means illumination that is projected onto a sign, building, or similar structure. 
Lamp means the component of an outdoor luminaire that produces light. 
Maintenance means the upkeep of a sign for the purpose of maintaining safety and appearance which may include painting, bulb replacement, panel replacement, letter replacement, repair of electrical components, and structural reinforcements to its original condition. 
Marquee sign means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Moving sign means a sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. 
Multi-tenant means one or more buildings, located on a single premises, containing two or more separate and distinct individual establishments, which occupy separate portions of the building and which are physically separated from each other by walls. 
Obscene, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, material is obscene if to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion; the material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and the material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as: 
(1)  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
(2)  Acts of masturbation; 
(3)  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
(4)  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
(5)  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
Out of store marketing device means any facility or equipment which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the owner's immediate presence, and which is manufactured to include a color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding the product or service provided thereby to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include fuel pumps, bank ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths. 
Pennant, streamer, means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Permanent sign means any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. A permanent freestanding sign shall be of a type and construction as not to be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
Permit means a sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the director. 
Permittee means the person and/or entity owning or leasing the land on which the sign is erected or for which an application has been submitted. 
Person means a natural or legal person, including a firm, organization, partnership, trust, and corporation. 
Portable sign means a sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure, including, but not limited to, signs on trailers or signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is suspended or projected from the wall, eave, or soffit of the building. 
Public sign means any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, or supported by the roof structure. 
Sign means any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Sign face means that part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Spill light means the light that illuminates surfaces beyond the intended area of illumination caused by the uncontrolled direct light component from the luminaires. 
Standard informational sign means a sign with an area of not greater than three square feet, with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1½ inches. 
Suspended sign means any sign which is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building. 
Temporary sign means any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than six inches from any wall, building, or structure. 
Window sign means any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 4, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-04-167 , § 1, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-5. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  Noncompliance. No person shall erect or cause to be erected any sign which does not comply with the standards of this chapter. 
(b)  Dangerous or defective. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the permittee of the sign, the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Separate violation. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  Notice. The director shall give the permittee ten to 30 days' written notice, based on the practical considerations of completing measures to comport with the standards of this chapter, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign which is in violation of this chapter. If the permittee refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the director will have the sign removed at the expense of the permittee. 
(f)  Citations. If any sign or other device covered by this chapter is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the director shall issue a citation. Additionally, the city may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use to correct or abate such violation. Any violation of this chapter shall be an offense, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, imprisonment for up to 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 20, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-6. - Powers and duties of personnel. 
The director is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce this article, unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-7. - Applicability. 
The standards of this chapter shall apply to all signs erected within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-8. - Permit required. 
Except where specifically not required by the standards of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, materially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way or from neighboring properties shall not be subject to the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-9. - Fees required. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the director and fees, as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-10. - Application content. 
Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed along with two additional copies by the person owning the subject lot, or the owner's agent with express permission of the owner. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  The value of the sign. 
(3)  A drawing to scale showing the thoroughfare address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of subject sign on subject property, the distance of the proposed sign from the subject property's boundaries, and all existing structures or buildings on the subject property. 
(4)  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size, and height of the subject sign to be placed on the property. 
(7)  For wall signs, two sets of building elevations. 
(8)  The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. All applicants for signs which incorporate electricity must obtain an electrical permit. 
(9)  Sign details, including a proposed color scheme of sign, and scaled elevation of the size and height of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent thoroughfare level. 
(10)  The zoning district in which the subject property is located, and a statement of compliance with all requirements of the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-11. - Comprehensive sign plan. 
The comprehensive sign plan is a program that may allow developers, business owners, residential communities, or other such projects to request special consideration of signs that are specifically integrated into the overall architectural style or theme for that project. Because signage serves an important role in the overall site design and aesthetic, a comprehensive sign plan can create an effect both desired and unique that will enhance the overall environment of the development. However, it is not the intent of this section to be used to request relief of the sign regulations in order to circumvent any requirements or purpose of this chapter; signs prohibited under the sign regulations may not be approved in a comprehensive sign plan. 
(1)  Condition of plan approval. Comprehensive sign plans may be required by the city council or planning commission as part of any project approval. 
(2)  Application information. Any comprehensive sign plan application shall be submitted to the planning department. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
a.  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this chapter. 
b.  The value of the sign. 
c.  A drawing to scale showing the thoroughfare address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of subject sign on subject property, the distance of the proposed sign from the subject property's boundaries, and all existing structures or buildings on the subject property. 
d.  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
e.  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
f.  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size, and height of the subject sign to be placed on the property. 
g.  For wall signs, two sets of building elevations. 
h.  The name, address, telephone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. All applicants for signs which incorporate electricity must obtain an electrical permit. 
i.  Sign details, including a proposed color scheme of sign, and scaled elevation of the size and height of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent thoroughfare level. 
j.  The zoning district in which the subject property is located, and a statement of compliance with all requirements of the zoning district. 
(3)  Authority and review. The planning commission shall have the authority under the conditions provided in this chapter to permit the utilization of comprehensive sign plans and may approve signs that are more restrictive than the sign regulations set forth in this chapter. 
a.  All comprehensive sign plan requests shall be heard by the planning commission at a public hearing. The applicant, their authorized agent, property owners and operators of the businesses affected shall be notified by mail of the time and place of the hearing. 
b.  Exceptions to the sign regulations in this chapter may be permitted, provided the planning commission finds that the comprehensive sign plan as a whole is in conformity with the purpose of this chapter and such exceptions are for the general welfare resulting in an improved relationship among the various signs, building facades, or overall project covered by the plan. 
c.  The planning commission may require special conditions on approved plans such as, but not limited to, bonds or other type of security to ensure the removal or abatement of signs that are abandoned or are in violation of any condition of an approved plan, or a time schedule for any sign program where signage is not considered permanent. 
d.  An approved comprehensive sign plan may be changed or modified subject to the same process as a new application. 
e.  The planning director may grant minor changes to an approved comprehensive sign plan provided any such change does not alter the overall architectural design or style of signs approved by such plan, and there is no increase in the total area of signs. 
(4)  Future signs. A comprehensive sign plan may be approved where signs for outparcels or other such detached future buildings have not been identified and considered under such approved plan. In these instances, unless otherwise conditioned, such future signs shall be subject to the requirements of the zoning district. 
(5)  Existing signs as part of a comprehensive sign plan. If any new or amended comprehensive sign plan is filed for property on which existing signs are located, those signs shall be integrated into the plan and shall be in compliance with that plan prior to issuance of a permit for any new sign permitted under said plan. 
(6)  Permits prohibited until decision rendered. No permit shall be issued for any sign on property where a comprehensive sign plan has been applied for and is pending a decision from the planning commission. 
(7)  Withdrawal of plan. 
a.  An approved comprehensive sign plan may be withdrawn by the applicant, provided: 
1.  It is not required as a condition of project approval; 
2.  No signs have been installed pursuant to such plan; 
3.  All signs installed since approval of said plan comply with the requirements of the zone district in which they are located; or 
4.  All signs in the center or project comply with the provisions of the zone district in which they are located. 
b.  The withdrawal shall be submitted in writing to the planning department. 
(8)  Binding effect. After approval of a comprehensive sign plan, no signs shall be erected, placed, painted, installed, or otherwise permitted, except in conformance with said plan. The plan shall be enforced in the same manner as any other provision in this chapter. The comprehensive sign plan shall be attached to the lease agreements or sale of space within the project and becomes binding for the entire site for both existing and future owners/tenants. In case of any conflict between the provisions of the plan and this chapter, the approved plan shall control. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 10, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-12. - Application rejection. 
(a)  Incomplete; false. The director shall reject any application that is incomplete or inaccurate, that contains false material statements or omissions, or that is for a sign which would violate any standard within this chapter within 45 business days of receipt of said application. The director may reject an application at any time prior to the expiration of the 45-day period, if the application is incomplete, inaccurate or contains false material statements or omissions, by returning the application to the applicant. 
(b)  Processing time; denial. The city shall process all complete and accurate sign permit applications within 45 business days of the city's actual receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon remittance of the appropriate sign permit fee. The director shall give notice to the applicant of his decision by hand delivery or by mailing such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th business day. If the decision of the director is to deny the application, the decision shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Failure of the city to act within the 45-day period shall be deemed a denial of the permit. If notice is mailed in conformity with this section, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing. Any application meeting the standards of this chapter will be granted. Any application not meeting the standards of this chapter will be denied. 
(c)  Appealable. A rejection pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the procedures for zoning appeals outlined in chapter 35, zoning. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, a final decision will be rendered within 90 days from date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the 90-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be affirmed. 
(d)  Resubmission. A rejected application later resubmitted in conformity with this chapter shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the original submission date. An application which is resubmitted shall meet all the standards for an original application. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 11, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-13. - Permit revocation. 
Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the director shall revoke said permit and the subject sign shall be immediately removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the procedures for zoning appeals outlined in chapter 35, zoning. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, a final decision will be rendered within 60 days from date an appeal is filed. If a final decision is not rendered within the 60-day period, the decision sought to be appealed shall be affirmed. The permit for any sign not meeting the standards of this chapter will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 12, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-14. - Zoning ordinance requirements. 
So long as an application conforms to the standards and procedures of this chapter, the applicant is exempted from any additional standards, excepting any standards relating to color, and procedures relating to signs in the city's ordinances regulating zoning. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 13, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-15. - Variance. 
(a)  Timing. The city council shall hear and decide upon a variance within 90 days of the submission of a complete and accurate application. 
(b)  Procedure. Except as modified by this chapter, the procedures for requesting a variance from the standards of this chapter shall be the same procedures as that for seeking a variance from the city's ordinances regulating zoning. 
(c)  Standards. The standards which shall be considered for granting a variance from the standards of this chapter shall be only the following: 
(1)  The topography of the lot on which the sign is located or to be located renders it impossible to comport with the strict standards of this chapter. 
(2)  The natural features of the lot on which the sign is located or to be located, or of the land immediately adjacent to the lot, impairs the visibility of the sign such that it cannot be seen. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 14, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-16. - Suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Violation. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be grounds for terminating the permit granted by the city to the permittee or the person or entity erecting the sign. No permit shall be suspended, revoked or canceled except for due cause, as hereinafter defined, and until after the permittee is granted a public hearing before the city council. 
(b)  Hearing. The permittee shall be given ten business days' written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the suspension, revocation, or canceling of such permit and/or license. The term "due cause" means the violation of the standards of this chapter. The termination of the permit does not in any way preclude the person alleged to have violated the standards of this chapter from being tried or preclude the city from taking any other action authorized by this Code and/or any action authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 15, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-17. - Expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one 90-day extension may be granted by the director. No refunds shall be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 16, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-18. - City occupation tax certificate, public liability insurance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city, unless and until such entity shall have obtained a city occupation tax certificate and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim, and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier shall notify the city 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage, including non-renewal, cancellation, and nonpayment of any premium. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 17, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-19. - Signs which require no permit. 
No permit is required for the following so long as all standards in this chapter and section 22-27 are met, including those set forth below: 
(1)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(2)  Flags; 
(3)  Window signs; 
(4)  Door signs not to exceed one square foot in size and not more than one sign per door; 
(5)  Standard informational signs; 
(6)  Temporary holiday decorations used to celebrate a single holiday or season. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 18, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-04-167 , § 2, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-20. - Prohibited signs and devices. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in the city: 
(1)  Signs. Any sign not specifically identified in this chapter as a permitted sign. 
(2)  Balloons; streamers. Balloons, streamers or air or gas filled figures. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any holiday decorations as defined in section 22-19(6) above are exempted from this prohibition. 
(3)  String lights. Signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line, or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within 150 feet of a thoroughfare and visible therefrom. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any holiday decorations as defined in section 22-19(6) above are exempted from this prohibition. 
(4)  Beacons; search lights; laser. Promotional beacons, search lights or laser lights or images. 
(5)  Audible signs. Audible signs. 
(6)  Signs in right-of-way. Signs in a public right of way, other than those belonging to a government, public service agency, or railroad. 
(7)  Signs on tree or utility pole. Signs mounted or located on a tree, utility pole, or other similar structure. 
(8)  Roof signs. Roof signs and signs which extend vertically above any portion of a roof or parapet of the applicable wall. 
(9)  Portable signs. Portable signs, including signs attached to any parked vehicle or trailer, so as to be visible from a public right-of way. This does not include promotional or identifying information painted on vehicles that are registered, operable, and regularly driven in the normal conduct of business. 
(10)  Obscene signs. Signs which depict obscene material. 
(11)  Illegal activity signs. Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state or local laws. 
(12)  Signs not maintained. Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, or containing or exhibiting broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters. 
(13)  Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs. 
(14)  Animated; flashing. Animated signs, flashing signs, and changeable copy signs which change more than once per 24 hours within 150 feet of a thoroughfare right-of-way. 
(15)  Imitation traffic signs. Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "warning," or similar words in such a manner as to resemble official traffic control signs. 
(16)  Billboard. A freestanding sign with an area of more than 72 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 19, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-04-167 , § 3, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-21. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Maintained. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
(b)  Repairs; material change. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted; provided, however, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the standards of this chapter. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of sign, then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this subsection. 
(c)  Grandfathering. Nonconforming signs may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The advertised business ceases at that location; 
(2)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or renders it dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt; or 
(3)  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs or a material change is required to restore the sign. No structural repairs or change in shape or size shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with all standards of this chapter. To the extent that any sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of sign then such sign may be repaired without regard to the restrictions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 21, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-22. - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
(a)  Removal order. The city may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(b)  Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within the time allowable pursuant to this chapter the city shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(c)  Removal without notice. The city shall have removed any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(d)  Removal after court determination. Other than signs located in a public right-of-way, a sign shall be removed by the city after a final determination by a court that the sign is unlawful and should be removed. If the permittee or owner fails to remove the sign the sign may be immediately removed and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 22, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-23. - Sign location. 
(a)  Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
(b)  Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or any part thereof, except authorized traffic signs, shall be located in any public right-of-way. No sign may be located any closer than 20 feet to an intersection as measured from the intersection of the two rights-of-way. 
(c)  Setback. Unless a more restrictive setback is specified in conditions of zoning or otherwise in this chapter, all signs except standard informational signs shall set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way or 20 feet from the edge of pavement if a private thoroughfare. No sign shall project over the right-of-way. Freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an intersection and shall be a minimum of 35 feet from any other freestanding signs. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 23, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-04-167 , § 4, 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-24. - Measurement of sign area. 
(a)  Size generally. The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest continuous polygon comprised of not more than eight straight lines enclosing the limits of a sign face, together with any sign face cabinet or frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. If polygons established around wall signs located on the same thoroughfare-oriented wall are within 24 inches or less of one another, then the area of the sign shall be measured within one continuous polygon. 
(b)  Structure. The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those parts contained within the polygon that delimits the sign face. 
(c)  Changeable copy signs. For any signs on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture or coloring forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. Such changeable copy signs cannot flash, and if located within 150 feet of a thoroughfare right-of-way, may not change more than once per 24 hours. 
(d)  Multi-faced signs. For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel and are back to back, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the areas on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 24, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-25. - Measurement of sign height. 
(a)  The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
(b)  In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public thoroughfare or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public thoroughfare, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the thoroughfare before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 25, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-26. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Building and safety codes. All signs permitted under this code shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable city building and safety codes. The city may remove after due notice any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  Faces. The face of a sign shall be flat, with protrusions of no more than two inches to allow for the texture of the sign and words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements. No sign or other advertising structure shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding therefrom. Lettering for address signage shall not exceed four inches in height or as required by the applicable building code. 
(c)  Illumination. Signs, when illumination is permitted and except as otherwise set forth, may only be illuminated externally. Free standing signs with external illumination shall have light directed downward. Externally illuminated signs shall not exceed 55 footcandles. All sign lighting shall comply with the city dark sky ordinance. 
(d)  Landscaping. Landscaping, weeds, and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of freestanding signs. 
(e)  Construction. Freestanding sign structure/base materials shall match the principal structures material. The architectural color standards of the district apply only to the sign structure not to the sign face. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 26, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-27. - Restrictions based on location. 
If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically allowed for a particular use as provided under this section shall be prohibited in that district, except as otherwise provided for under this chapter. The following standards govern signs based on the sign's location. 
Table 22-27. Sign Restrictions Based on Location 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-140, art. 27, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-04-167 , §§ 5, 6, 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 26 - SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Chattahoochee Hills." 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 2.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purposes. 
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  Promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the city and to guide future growth in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  Prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the overall value of land. 
(4)  Ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, and transportation facilities. 
(5)  Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(6)  Establish procedures for the subdivision and resubdivision of land in order to further the orderly development of land. 
(7)  Provide for the proper monumenting of subdivided land and proper legal descriptions. 
(8)  Help eliminate the costly maintenance problems that develop when thoroughfares and lots are established without proper consideration given to various public purposes. 
(9)  Facilitate and inform lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 2.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-3. - Scope. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition or later edition. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 4.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-4. - Use and interpretation. 
The following shall apply to the use of all words in this resolution: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(3)  The term "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The term "should" implies a preference supportive of the city's interest rather than a requirement. 
(5)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(6)  The term "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(7)  Terms defined in chapter 35, zoning, shall apply to this chapter unless otherwise separately defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 4.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access means a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Access easement means an easement devoted to vehicular or pedestrian access which affords a principal means of access to abutting property, and which, when improved, is improved to the standards of the city. 
Alley means a strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a thoroughfare. 
Arcade means a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is a colonnade supporting floor area that overlaps the sidewalk, while the primary facade remains at the primary facade setback. An arcade does not encroach in the public right-of-way. 
Bicycle boulevard means a thoroughfare with shared vehicular lanes that introduces traffic calming and wayfinding solutions to give movement priority to bicyclists. 
Bicycle box means a section of pavement designed to give bicyclists using a bicycle lane a head start at signalized intersections. A bicycle box is often colored and includes a standard white bicycle pavement marking. It improves visibility between motorists turning right and cyclists traveling through the intersection. 
Bicycle inductor loop means a coil of wire embedded in a thoroughfare surface that detects the presence of a bicycle and prioritizes an intersection signal for it. 
Bicycle lane means a dedicated lane for cycling within a moderate-speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping. 
Bicycle lane, buffered, means a bicycle lane separated from vehicular travel and/or parking lanes by striped pavement markings which function as a buffer. 
Bicycle lane, contra-flow, means a designated bicycle lane marked to allow bicyclists to travel against the flow of traffic. 
Bicycle lane, conventional, means a bicycle lane for which the only separation from vehicular traffic is pavement striping. 
Bicycle lane, physically separated, means a unidirectional or bidirectional bicycle lane separated from the motor vehicle travel lanes by curbs, railings, plantings, parked cars, and/or grade separation. 
Bicycle locker means an enclosed and secured locker that provides bicycle parking for long term use. 
Bicycle path means a dual-direction bikeway that is physically separated from vehicular thoroughfares, usually shared with pedestrians, runners, and rollerbladers and detailed for the more urban areas. 
Bicycle route means a thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds. 
Bicycle shelter means a roofed shelter that provides multiple bicycle racks for public use. 
Bicycle station means a building that provides self-service, attended indoor valet, or automated bicycle parking services, often accompanied by showers, lockers, bicycle repair and rental facilities. 
Bicycle trail means a bicycle way running independently of a vehicular thoroughfare 
Bikeway means any designated thoroughfare or part of a thoroughfare for bicycling. See Bicycle lane, Bicycle route, and Bicycle trail. 
Bikeway riding surface means the portion of a bikeway used for cycling, the equivalent of the vehicular lanes or roadbed for motor traffic. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk. The term "caliper" is used for trees less than 12 inches in diameter. For trees less than four inches in diameter, it its measured six inches from the ground. For trees between four inches and 12 inches in diameter, it is measured 12 inches from the ground. 
Concept plan means a generalized plan indicating the boundaries of a tract under common ownership, and identifying proposed land use, land use intensity, and thoroughfare alignment. A generalized plan for a subdivision that indicates the uses, densities, and intensities that will be developed across the property, as well as thoroughfare alignment, though it is not an engineering document. It also illustrates the subdivider's understanding of the requirements of the city's development regulations and provides an opportunity to correct any misunderstandings before money is spent on a full preliminary plat. 
Conservation means the management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or degradation. 
Conservation areas, primary, means any property qualifying as conservation use property under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4; and any steep mountain slopes, floodplains, wetlands, soils subject to slumping, water bodies, upland buffers around wetlands and water bodies, critical wildlife habitat, rock outcroppings, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes; and any "sensitive natural area" as defined herein. 
Conservation areas, secondary, means prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and lands containing scenic views and sites, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes. 
Conservation easement means a legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Fulton County. A conservation easement permanently restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by the city council and restricts further subdivision or development. Such agreement also provides for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder and any other co-signers. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tract's or lot's special resources from negative changes. 
Conservation subdivision means a subdivision where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
Contiguous common parcels means parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
Countermeasure means a design technique or facility intended to mitigate unsafe or unappealing bicycling conditions. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means a circular area centered on the trunk of an existing tree that has a radius of 12 inches for every inch of diameter at breast height (DBH) of the tree. 
Cross section means a profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline of a thoroughfare, stream, or other feature. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary, means a nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the temporary termination of a thoroughfare or alley. 
Curb cut means a lowered curb level or a curb break that allows vehicular access between a thoroughfare and an abutting property. 
Curb radius means the measurement of the sharpness of a corner. Specifically, the radius of the arc of the curb at the corner of two intersecting thoroughfares. 

Deceleration lane means an added thoroughfare lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the director that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat means a plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Design speed means the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement including four ranges of speed: 
(1)  Very low: below 20 m.p.h. 
(2)  Low: 20 to 25 m.p.h. 
(3)  Moderate: 25 to 35 m.p.h. 
(4)  High: above 35 m.p.h. 
Detention means the temporary restraining of stormwater on-site. 
Detention pond means a pond or pool used for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff and which provides for the controlled release of such stormwater. 
Development permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing development work on a site, including permits for land disturbance and construction of infrastructure. 
Development plan means any plan containing substantial information required to be filed by this chapter, which shows how the property to be affected by the development will be changed and improved in a specific manner, including the installation of thoroughfares and utilities and the erection of buildings and structures, among other specific requirements. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means a standard method of expressing the diameter or the trunk or bole of a standing (existing) tree measured 4.5 feet above ground in existing tree surveys. 
Diverter means a design intervention that limits vehicular traffic from entering all or part of a thoroughfare but that enables bicycles to pass through. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Easement means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. (See Figure.) 

Escrow account means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the director to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Excavation means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "cut." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Full cutoff means a luminaire type that does not allow any light to be emitted or reflected above a horizontal plane. 
Gated community means residential areas containing lots and that restrict access to thoroughfares and spaces. Gates can include guard houses, electronic arms operated by card, codes, or remote control devices. Visitors must stop to be verified for entry. Gated communities are not permitted. See section 26-113(e). 
Gradient means the rate of vertical change between two distance points, determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance (i.e., rise over run). 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grub means to clear by digging up roots and stumps. 
Greenway means a linear park or open space conservation area that provides recreational opportunities, pedestrian, equestrian, and/or bicycle paths, and/or conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
Habitat for endangered or threatened species means an area verified by the state department of natural resources as: 
(1)  Actually containing naturally-occurring individuals of a species that has been listed as endangered or threatened under the federal Endangered Species Act, as amended; and 
(2)  Being likely to support the continued existence of that species by providing for a significant portion of that species' biological requirements, and that meets the definition of "natural conditions" as defined by this chapter. 
Homeowners association means an organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Impact means the effect of any direct manmade actions or indirect repercussions of manmade actions on existing physical, social, or economic conditions. 
Improvement means the physical addition and change to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Lamp means the source of illumination in a lighting fixture. 
Land trust means a private, nonprofit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources, such as productive farm or forest land, natural areas, historic structures, and recreational areas. Land trusts purchase and accept donations of conservation easements. They educate the public about the need to conserve land and some provide land-use services to local governments and individual citizens. 
Letter of credit means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 

Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a thoroughfare is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. Such lots have elongated access from the thoroughfare and a conventionally proportioned building site at the rear of the lot. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the clerk of the Fulton County superior court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to May 5, 2015. 
Lot width means the shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required front building line, or in the absence of a front building line regulation, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line of the building located or intended to be located on the lot. 

Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting thoroughfares. 
Mixed use district means all TN, VL, and HM-MU districts and some HM-SD districts. 
Mortgage lot means a lot which is created for the primary or sole purpose of meeting the requirement of a bank or lending institution for a loan or mortgage in cases where property descriptions must be smaller than the total acreage of the tract on which the principal building that is the subject of the loan is located. 
Multi-use path means a path that is physically separated from vehicular thoroughfares, shared by bicyclists, pedestrians, runners, rollerbladers, horses, and other non-motorized users. 
Natural conditions means the flora, fauna, soil, terrain, and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
Original tract means a unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
Passage means a pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long blocks and connects rear parking areas to frontages. 
Pavement width means the width of a given lane, thoroughfare, or other thoroughfare pavement, measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb, or to the edge of pavement where no curbs are required or exist. 
Pedestrian shed means an area, approximately circular, that is centered on a common destination. A pedestrian shed is applied to determine the approximate size of a neighborhood. A standard pedestrian shed is one-fourth mile radius or 1,320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. It has been shown that provided with a pedestrian environment, most people will walk this distance rather than drive. The outline of the shed must be refined according to actual site conditions, particularly along thoroughfares. Sometimes called a "walkshed" or "walkable catchment." 
Pedestrian way means a pedestrian path on a public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may, in addition to providing pedestrian access, be used for the installation of utility lines. 
Peg-a-track means parallel dashed pavement markings that continue a bicycle lane through an intersection. 
Performance bond means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the director to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The city may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
Performance guarantee means any financial deposit or other security that may be accepted by the city as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for subdivision or land development are satisfactorily completed in conformance with approved plans. 
Potable water means water that is suitable for human consumption, human contact, or in the preparation of foods for human consumption. 
Professional engineer means an engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the state to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Recreation, active, means leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
Recreation, passive, means leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
Registered land surveyor means a surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the state to practice in the field of land surveying. 
Regulating plan map is one element of the preliminary plat application for mixed use districts that designates the locations of certain district features. The regulating plan map shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Thoroughfare network, identifying thoroughfare typologies. 
(2)  Pedestrian sheds. 
(3)  Civic space and civic buildings. 
(4)  Terminated vistas. 
(5)  Commercial streets/commercial frontages. 
Reservation means the designation by plat or deed of a certain area reserved for possible future public purposes. A reservation does not transfer title of the reserved area to the public unless the governing authority accepts the area for public purposes. 
Resubdivision means the act of changing an existing lot created by a plat and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Fulton County. 
Reserve strip means a strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a thoroughfare, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future thoroughfare extension or widening. 
Retention means the permanent maintenance of stormwater on-site. 
Retention pond means a pond or pool used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use; generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
Right-of-way, private, means that area, distinguished from an access easement or public right-of-way, dedicated to property owners of the subdivision involved or to other individuals, and which affords permanent access to abutting property. A private right-of-way is distinguishable from a public road right-of-way in that maintenance and ownership of the road and accessory improvements is by private individuals or a private association rather than the local governing body or another governmental entity. 
Right-of-way, public, means that area, distinguished from an easement or private road right-of-way, which is owned in fee-simple title by the local governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Riprap means rocks, rubble, or stones, irregularly shaped and at least six inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil stabilization. 
Sensitive natural area means any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; rare or exemplary natural communities; significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; and/or other areas so designated by the department of natural resources that are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Sewer, sanitary, means a sewer that carries sewage and residential or nonresidential waste. 
Sewer, storm, means a sewer that carries stormwater, surface water, and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and residential, and nonresidential wastes. 
Shared vehicular lane marking means a pavement marking featuring a bicycle symbol and chevron, applied to a thoroughfare too narrow to accommodate bicycle lanes and with vehicular target speeds slow enough to allow cyclists to move safely with motor vehicles. 
Sharrow. See Shared vehicular lane marking. 
Sight visibility triangle means the areas at the corners of an intersection of two thoroughfares, or at the intersection of a thoroughfare and any driveway, which may vary based on type of thoroughfare involved, that are to be kept free of vegetation, trees, shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, buildings, structures, or other materials or objects that may impair or impede a person's ability to observe other persons or traffic on the adjacent intersecting thoroughfare and/or driveway. 

Steep slopes means lands with slopes of at least 35 percent, as indicated in the comprehensive plan of the city, or which can be calculated with the aid of a United States Geological Survey 1:24,000, 7.5-minute quadrangle topographic map or other available topographic information. 
Structural soil means a load-bearing soil that resists compaction to allow for healthier tree root growth. Angular gravel within the soil mix allows air and water to permeate while supporting pavement loads. 
Subdivider means any person who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person. 
Subdivision means a division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including all division of land involving the dedication of a new thoroughfare or a change in existing thoroughfares. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
Subdivision, major, means the division of a tract or parcel of land that does not qualify for the minor subdivision process. Major subdivisions may involve the construction of a new public or private thoroughfare or the upgrade of an existing private access way to city standards. Major subdivisions are processed in multiple steps including preliminary plat approval (unless specifically exempted), approval of construction plans and issuance of development permits, and final plat approval. Any parcel created by the major subdivision process after the date of passage of this chapter may not be further subdivided by the minor subdivision process. 
Subdivision, minor, means a subdivision of three or fewer lots that is processed administratively by the director as final plat applications that do not require preliminary plat approval. Any improvements to an existing public thoroughfare abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the installation of utilities along said existing public thoroughfare, as may be required to comply with this chapter, shall be done according to plans and permit requirements of this chapter, but said requirements shall not subject the minor subdivision to the requirements for a major subdivision as specified in this chapter. Any lot created by minor subdivision may not be subsequently divided by the minor subdivision process. 
Thoroughfare, marginal access, means a residential thoroughfare parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through-traffic. 
Thoroughfare, stub-out, means a thoroughfare having one end open to traffic and being temporarily terminated at the other. Stub-outs generally do not have a temporary vehicular turn-around. This temporary termination is to provide connectivity to future developments and shall be constructed to meet the standards of the city fire department. Stub-out thoroughfares must be permanently posted "Future Through Street." 
Trail means a way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or cyclists using non-motorized bicycles. 
Turfgrass means a continuous plant coverage consisting of a grass species that is regularly mowed to maintain a desired height. 
Undergrounding means the placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, thoroughfares, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the city. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. 
Vacation means the termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement, right-of-way, or public dedication of land. 
Vicinity map means a map, not necessarily to scale, showing the general location of the proposed subdivision or land development in relation to major thoroughfares, government boundaries, and/or natural features. 
Well means a hole or shaft excavated, bored, drilled, dug, or driven to tap an underground supply of water. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 4.3, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-6—26-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-29. - Administration. 
(a)  Fees. The fees for various applications required by this chapter shall be as set by separate resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Additional specifications. The director is hereby authorized to prepare and recommend standard drawings and construction specifications for private and public improvements not specified in this chapter. Upon their adoption by the governing authority, they shall become mandatory. 
(c)  Variances. All required for variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the variance procedures established in chapter 35, zoning. 
(d)  Inspections. The director shall be authorized to inspect premises proposed for subdivision or land development, including any improvements within such subdivision or land development, to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other laws and regulations of the city. No person shall refuse entry or access to any person authorized to conduct inspections who presents appropriate credentials for same, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such person while in the process of carrying out his official duties. The director is authorized to establish procedures for inspection of land development activity at various intervals in the development process, including without limitation inspection procedures for erosion control, the initiating of grading or land-disturbing activity, installation of on-site sewage disposal systems or sanitary sewer, installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities, and installation of thoroughfare curbing and gutter, thoroughfare sub-grade, base, or paving. 
(e)  Enforcement, violations, remedies, and penalties. 
(1)  No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer title to any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the director in accordance with the provisions of this article and filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the sole use of a metes and bounds description shall be prohibited. 
(3)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  If any person fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this chapter, the city council, the director, or the city attorney, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to stop, prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful use. 
(5)  Appropriate civil actions may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover damages; to restrain or enjoin, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties provided in subsection (e)(4) of this section. 
(f)  Amendment. The city council may amend this chapter in a manner consistent with state law. Before enacting such amendment to this chapter, the planning commission shall provide a recommendation on the proposed amendment. The city council shall hold a public hearing thereon as required in chapter 35, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 3.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-30. - Authority and delegation. 
(a)  Authority. These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers vested in cities by the State of Georgia Constitution, home rule powers, state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of comprehensive plans, and the protection of vital areas of the state. 
(b)  Delegation of powers to planning commission. The planning commission is vested with the authority to review and recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of preliminary plats of major subdivisions in HM, VL, and TN zoning districts, and variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Delegation of powers to the director. The director is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or deny final plats of minor subdivisions and minor resubdivisions, farmette subdivisions, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, construction plans and final plats of major subdivisions when preliminary plat approval has been obtained from the city council. The director shall also be authorized to review major subdivisions and major resubdivisions for conformity to the requirements of this chapter, to make reports and recommendations to the planning commission and the city council on major subdivisions and major resubdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this chapter. The director may further delegate some of these powers to other city staff as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 3.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-31. - Applicability and general provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all real property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Land is one tract until subdivided. Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval or minor plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
(c)  Subdivision of land. No person shall sell or offer to sell, by deed, map, plat or other instrument, any parcel of land not subdivided under the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or sell land by reference to, or by exhibition of, or by other use of, a plat of a land subdivision that has not been approved and recorded in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The description of such land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction. No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton County, and it shall be unlawful to record such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it shall have been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Development or improvement of land. No person shall disturb or develop land or engage in development except in accordance with this chapter. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to disturb or develop any land until construction plans submitted and the development permit, if required, has been approved by the director in accordance with this chapter. No person shall begin construction of any improvement on any lot prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this chapter, nor prior to approval of a development plan for said improvement as required by this chapter. The director shall not authorize or permit the clearance of trees and vegetative materials, except for grubbing, outside approved construction limits. 
(e)  Pre-application meeting required. A pre-application meeting shall be scheduled with the director prior to the submission of a concept plan. If no concept plan is required, the pre-application meeting shall take place prior to the submission of a preliminary plat application. 
(f)  Concept plan required prior to preliminary plat application. A concept plan shall be approved by the city council before the director shall accept an application for preliminary plat approval in TN, VL, and HM districts. 
(g)  Preliminary plat and plans required prior to construction. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat if required by this chapter, nor prior to approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements are approved as required by this chapter. 
(h)  Building and other permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy, if required by the local government, shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this chapter that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Public thoroughfares and lands. No land dedicated as a public thoroughfare or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public thoroughfare or for other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this chapter and said land and/or improvements are formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the city council in accordance with procedures established in this chapter. 
(j)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the director or other official responsible for the administration of this chapter may file an appeal to the city council in accordance with chapter 35, zoning. 
(k)  Special review of subdivisions along state routes. No subdivision plat containing land that abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the state department of transportation, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. When the city receives such a plat, it shall submit two copies of the proposed subdivision plat to the state department of transportation if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway system. The state department of transportation, within 30 days of receipt of the plat, shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy to be returned to the director or recommend rejection. Failure of the state department of transportation to act within this 30-day period shall constitute approval. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be given to the director in writing. A recommendation for rejection shall be binding on the director and the planning commission unless the planning commission, by official action recorded in its minutes, overrules the recommendation for rejection. 
(l)  Conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission. 
(2)  The director shall not approve plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(3)  Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land for public use and the director or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not acquired consistent with appropriate agency plans, policies, or priorities, the director may either refuse to approve the plat, or require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 3.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-32. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(3)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(4)  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(5)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the local jurisdiction concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
(6)  Mortgage lots, as defined by this chapter. 
(7)  Establishment of a conservation easement on a property. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 3.4, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-33—26-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOTS AND PLATS 

Sec. 26-53. - Lot combinations. 
(a)  An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the director and recorded as a final plat. 
(c)  Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. (See figure.) 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-54. - Boundary line adjustments. 
(a)  One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the director and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. 
(b)  In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the director and recorded. 
(c)  Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. (See figure.) 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-55. - Design requirements for blocks. 
(a)  Block length. Intersecting thoroughfares shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic. Blocks in non-rural areas shall not exceed 600 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. In both rural areas and non-rural areas in all districts, block structures shall enable through traffic and multiple route options. 
(b)  Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. A single tier of lots may be acceptable when bounded on one or more sides by an alley or pedestrian path. Blocks intended for nonresidential use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-thoroughfare parking and deliveries. (See figure.) 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-56. - Design requirements for lots. 
(a)  Natural features and assets. In the subdividing of land, appropriate consideration must be given to all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed development and safety from hazards. The concept plan application shall include aerial photos and an analysis of natural features, including trees, rock outcroppings, steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, historic features, and any other notable features that could guide the site design. 
(b)  Access and minimum lot frontage. Each lot shall have access to a public thoroughfare and a minimum of 35 feet of lot frontage on a public thoroughfare in rural areas, and 12 feet of lot frontage in non-rural areas; provided, however, that farmette and minor subdivision lots may be permitted to be accessed by private thoroughfares, as more fully specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Adequate buildable area required. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is unsuitable for residential or other use for topographical or other reasons, shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by the governing authority, including, but not limited to, stream buffers and setbacks. (See figure.) 

(d)  Lot remnants not permitted. All remnants of lots below any required minimum lot size that may be required, left over after subdividing of a larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The director may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as a detention pond or public use, provided that access and design is appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific non-building use. 
(e)  Service areas. Nonresidential lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-thoroughfare parking suitable to the use intended. 
(f)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than that established by the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, or any other such ordinance provisions, if applicable. 
(g)  Lot width. No portion of a lot shall be narrower than 12 feet, with the exception of cul-de-sac lots at the thoroughfare frontage, nor shall any lot have a lot width less than that established by the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, if applicable. 
(h)  Lot depth. Lots shall have a depth of not less than 50 feet, unless circumstances make these limitations impracticable. 
(i)  Flag lots. 
(1)  Intent. Flag lots, as defined in this chapter, are strongly discouraged. however, subdivisions designed with one or more flag lots may be approved where conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible or impractical due to the configuration of the lot to be subdivided. Private thoroughfares are a preferred solution. 
(2)  Denial if reasonable alternative exists. The director in the case of minor subdivisions and farmettes, and the planning commission and city council in the case of other subdivisions, shall have due cause to deny any plat that proposes any flag lot, when a reasonable alternative to such lot pattern is available. 
(3)  Panhandle (flag pole) length restriction. If permitted, no flag lot shall be allowed to be platted that has a "panhandle" portion (i.e., the narrow portion of the lot, designed for access rather than designed for building) that is more than 400 feet in length. 
(4)  Prohibition of abutting flag lots. If permitted, no flag lot shall abut another flag lot in any subdivision. 
(j)  Side lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight thoroughfare lines or radial to curved thoroughfare lines. 
(k)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet the front building setback requirements, if applicable, from all rights-of-way. 
(l)  Multiple frontage lots. Multiple frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or boulevards or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Multiple frontage lots with frontage on a highway or boulevard thoroughfare shall have additional depth in order to allow space for screen planting along the lot line abutting a highway or boulevard thoroughfare. 
(m)  Mortgage lot. This provision addresses situations where a bank requires the creation of small (e.g., one-acre to five-acre) tract of property from a larger existing parcel (usually farmland or timber land) in order to provide a mortgage or loan on a home or other principal building, rather than referring to the entire existing lot of record. 
(1)  In cases where a person can show the director in writing that an application for loan or mortgage involving real property has been filed with a bank or lending institution, and said bank or lending institution requires, for the purposes of the loan or mortgage, a description of property that encompasses less land area than the lot of record, one or two mortgage lots (see definition) may be lawfully created from the parcel of record without constituting a subdivision. Minimum lot sizes established by any zoning district or other ordinance requirement of the city shall not be construed to prevent the creation of mortgage lots pursuant to this subsection, even if the resulting mortgage lot created is less than the minimum lot size required by said zoning district or other ordinance requirement. The applicant shall be required in the case of a mortgage lot to file with the director a copy of the survey plat creating the mortgage lot, and may be recorded in the records of the Fulton County superior court clerk as a mortgage lot plat of record. 
(2)  If created, a mortgage lot shall be no less than one acre and no larger than five acres in size. This provision shall not allow for the creation of a mortgage lot from any lot of record that is five acres or less in area. 
(3)  No mortgage lot shall be created unless it has a minimum 30-foot-wide access easement from a thoroughfare abutting the property frontage of the larger lot of record to the boundary of the mortgage lot. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-57. - Easements. 
(a)  Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream traverses a subdivision, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement of adequate width. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the director. 
(b)  Where easements are needed for utility locations, the subdivider shall provide them to the appropriate utility provider. Where easements are needed for public water and/or sanitary sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the director. 
(c)  Where easements are needed to ensure public access on private thoroughfares, the subdivider shall provide them to the city. 
(d)  Where easements are needed to ensure private access on access ways or private drives, the subdivider shall provide them to the adjoining property owners affected. These easements shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court and copies supplied to the director as a part of the final plat application. 
(e)  All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat, if required, and final plat. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-58. - Survey monuments for all lots required. 
(a)  For all subdivisions, a state registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than one-half inch in diameter and 18 inches in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. 
(b)  Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of section 180-7-.05, Monument, of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-59. - Concept plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure a general understanding of the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a concept plan of all major subdivisions for approval by the planning commission. 
(b)  When required. All major subdivisions, as defined, in TN, VL, or HM districts shall require the submission of a concept plan to the director for review by the planning commission and approval by the city council. Prior to application for preliminary plat approval, the planning commission must approve the concept plan, if required. 
(c)  Concept plan application and specifications. Concept plan applications shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Site assessment. A thorough assessment of site conditions shall be submitted, demonstrating an understanding of the natural, cultural, and historic features that will guide or constrain the design of the subdivision. This should include soils, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, streams, rock outcroppings, tree cover, historic structures, and any other sensitive, unique, notable, or constraining features. 
(2)  Bubble diagram. A site map with areas of activity indicated with general boundaries, showing proposed uses and densities. This should include, among other information, commercial centers, major civic sites, open space, entrances and major circulation thoroughfares, any special districts or special conditions, etc. 
(3)  Statements. Statements of proposed uses, proposed densities, and proposed water supply and sewage disposal. 
(d)  Procedures. Upon receipt of a completed concept plan application, the director shall forward all pertinent materials in the application to the planning commission for review and schedule the application for a public meeting before the planning commission. An application for concept plan approval must be submitted in accordance with the filing deadlines established by the department of community development. The planning commission shall have 40 days from the date the public meeting is held to recommend that the city council approve, conditionally approve, or deny the concept plan application. The city council shall then consider the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the concept plan application. The basis of the planning commission's review and the city council's action on a concept plan shall be whether the concept plan is consistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and all other ordinances that relate to the proposed development, as well as the comprehensive plan and other plans adopted by the city. 
(e)  Approval is conditional. The concept plan shall be conditioned upon approval of a preliminary plat, and shall not make permissible any of the uses, densities or intensities as proposed until a preliminary plat application is submitted and approved for all or a portion of the area covered by the concept plan. 
(f)  Disposition. Approval of a concept plan shall be valid for a period of one year, during which time a preliminary plat application must be submitted. If a preliminary plat application is not submitted during that time, concept plan approval shall expire and be null and void. 
(g)  Amendments to approved concept plans. The director is authorized to approve minor amendments to concept plans. Any proposed amendment to a concept plan that is determined by the director to constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. For all amendments to concept plans determined to be major amendments, city council approval shall be required. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a concept plan. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a concept plan shall be the same as required for an initial application for concept plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-60. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a preliminary plat of all major subdivisions for review by the planning commission and approval by the city council. 
(b)  When required. All major subdivisions, as defined, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the director for approval by the planning commission. Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance or development, or the installation of any improvements, the planning commission must approve the preliminary plat, if required. 
(c)  Preliminary plat application and specifications. Preliminary plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 26-62-1, and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 26-62-2. Preliminary plats that do not conform to the approved concept plan shall not be scheduled for planning commission review until a concept plan amendment has been approved. 
(d)  Procedures. Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the director shall forward all pertinent materials in the application to the planning commission for review and schedule the application for a public meeting before the planning commission. An application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted in accordance with the filing deadlines established by the department of community development. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary plat application. The basis of the planning commission's action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat is consistent with the approved concept plan, and whether it meets the purposes and requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and all other ordinances that relate to the proposed development, as well as the comprehensive plan and other plans adopted by the city. 
(e)  Notification of amendments. If the director has approved a minor amendment to the concept plan, he shall present a report on the amendment to the planning commission with the preliminary plat application. If the planning commission finds that any amendment deemed minor by the director constitutes a public interest, it shall refer the amendment to the city council for approval before rendering a decision on the preliminary plat. Procedures for considering a referred amendment to a concept plan shall be the same as required for an initial application for concept plan approval. 
(f)  Disposition. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one year, after which time a complete development permit or construction plans application must be submitted. If a completed application for construction plans is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
(g)  Amendments to approved preliminary plats. The director is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats. Any proposed amendment to a preliminary plat that is determined by the director to constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. For all amendments to preliminary plats determined to be major amendments, planning commission approval shall be required. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a preliminary plat. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-61. - Construction plans and development permit. 
(a)  Application. Upon approval of a preliminary plat, or if no preliminary plat is required, the subdivider or land developer may apply for construction plan approval and approval of a development permit. In the case of a minor subdivision, or in cases where a preliminary plat is not required by this article, the subdivider or land developer may apply for approval of construction plans; provided, however, that in the case of a minor subdivision or land development the applicant for construction plan approval shall hold a pre-application conference with the director to ensure that plans meet the intent and specific provisions of this chapter and other applicable regulations. The construction plan approval and development permitting process is administrative. Applications for construction plan approval and development permit shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Tables 26-62-1 and 26-62-2. No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor development permit approved by the director until a preliminary plat, if required, has been approved by the planning commission and the proposed construction plans are determined by the director to be in substantial conformity with said approval and any conditions of such approval. 
(b)  Decision criteria. The only basis upon which the director may deny a construction plan or development permit is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable local regulations or the failure of the construction plans and application to meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval specified by the planning commission. 
(c)  Certificate of approval. All copies of the construction plans shall be noted by inscription on the plan noting such approval by the director. Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year, unless activity toward improvements on the land has been initiated, or unless the director approves an extension of time. 
(d)  Engineering drawings. Engineering drawings for public and private thoroughfares, including cross sections and centerline profiles, and public and private water, sewer, drainage, and utility systems, certified by a professional engineer registered in the state, or if authorized under state law, a registered land surveyor, or professional landscape architect, shall be required to be submitted for review and approval, and such plans must meet the requirements of this chapter and the specifications of the director. Prior to approval and recording of a final plat, or prior to the approval of any certificate of occupancy, if required, a registered engineer for the subdivider/developer shall submit one copy of all finished, as-built plans of improvements, demonstrating that said improvements, as installed, meet the requirements of this chapter and certifying that the plans accurately reflect actual construction and installation. The director shall maintain all as-built thoroughfare and utility plans for future use by the city. 
(e)  Permits for construction in public right-of-way. Permits from the director shall be required for construction in any public right-of-way. Permits will not be issued until such time that plans have been submitted and approved by the director. 
(f)  Improvements to abutting land. For subdivisions and land developments that abut and access an abutting public thoroughfare, the subdivider or land developer shall install all required curb and gutter, sidewalk, deceleration lanes, and other thoroughfare improvements, according to standards and specifications of this chapter and the director, along all abutting public thoroughfares. When a subdivision or land development with any commercial component uses an unpaved public right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with city thoroughfare design standards. Said improvements shall be from the subdivision or land development entrance to the paved city thoroughfare which the director determines will be the primary direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land development. 
(g)  Land disturbance permit must be approved. If construction activity contemplated results in the disturbance of an area of one acre or more, a land disturbance permit must be approved along with any building permit prior to construction. 
(h)  Indemnity agreement form must be filed. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, an indemnity agreement form must be filed by the subdivider protecting the city against damage, repair and/or maintenance claims and liability arising out of drainage problems. The director, or his designee, is hereby authorized to execute such agreements on the behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-62. - Final plat. 
(a)  When required. All major subdivisions, resubdivisions, minor subdivisions, and dedications shall require final plat approval. The final plat approval process is administrative. Applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 26-62-1. 
(b)  Criteria for approval. The director may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met. 
(1)  The planning commission has previously approved a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, if required (not required for minor subdivision). 
(2)  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have been approved by the director, all improvements have been installed and inspected by the director or his designee, and subdivision improvement guarantees and bonds as required by this chapter or the conditions of zoning or conditions of preliminary plat approval have been submitted. 
(3)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required for final plats by this chapter. 
(5)  All open space has been permanently protected by a conservation easement and copies of all conservation easements have been filed with the director. 
(6)  Homeowner's association or property owner's association documents that have been determined to be in compliance with the requirements of section 26-90. 
(c)  Ministerial action of approval. The director shall consider final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced criteria have not been met. 
(d)  Approval certificate. Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given preliminary approval by the City Council on _______, 20___, and final approval by the Director and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Fulton County Superior Court. 
_______ 
Director 
(e)  Additional plat certificates. In addition to information required by Table 26-62-1 to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the following certificates. 
(1)  Surveyor's certificate. A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
It is hereby certified that this Plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the Property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: _______ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.: ________ 
(2)  Owner's certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
The owner of the land shown on this Plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this Plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever those water and sewer improvements constructed or to be constructed in accordance with this plat that are specifically labeled as dedicated to the public, and the Public Thoroughfare Rights-of-Way as shown on this Plat. 

 
___________ 
Owner 
Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
___________ 
Witness 
___________ 
Notary Public 
(3)  Health department approval certificate. 
FULTON COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
This subdivision, as shown, is approved upon the condition that sewage disposal and water supply facilities are in compliance with Articles C and D, Sewage Disposal and Drinking Water Supply of the Fulton County Health Department regulations and in accordance with the requirements below: 

 
(4)  Future minor subdivision certificate. The subdivision plat recorded with Fulton County Clerk of Superior Court must contain the following whether or not the plat contains minor subdivision lots: 
"This Property may not be further subdivided using the Minor Subdivision process." 
(f)  Distribution of recorded final plat. The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The director shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this subsection receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
(1)  The county tax commissioner. 
(2)  The county tax assessor. 
(3)  The county health department. 
(4)  The county GIS coordinator. 
(5)  The 911 coordinator. 
(6)  The local postmaster. 
(7)  The county school board. 
At the discretion of the director, additional agencies or persons may be added to the above list. 
Table 26-62-1. Application Requirements 
The director may allow or require electronic copies of any of the following requirements, including, but not limited to PDF, CAD, or GIS files. 

 
Table 26-62-2. Plat and Plan Requirements 

 
Additional Requirements 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.10, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-63. - Project phasing. 
(a)  Purpose. Towns, villages, and hamlets that are developed over a long period of time may be separated into multiple development phases. As market conditions change, the development's product mix may need to change also. On the other hand, certain aspects of the development's relationship to the city need to remain consistent with the approved plan. 
(b)  For each phase of development, the applicant shall provide an accounting of the development rights and obligations applied in that phase and those reserved for future phases, including 
(1)  The amount of land in each phase. 
(2)  The amount of entitlements used - residential units, commercial space, open space. 
(3)  The amount of land permanently protected, including preservation and civic uses. 
(c)  The following entitlements phasing chart shall appear on all town, village, and hamlet plats: 
Entitlements Phasing Chart 

 
(d)  Some required features of town, village, and hamlet subdivisions might not be planned for phase one of construction. Provision of these features still must be provided before phase one construction begins. The following district-wide information shall be included, or updated when previously provided, with the phase one application and each subsequent phase: 
(1)  Site analysis for the entire site. 
(2)  Identification of primary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas for future phases do not need to be included. 
(3)  Major thoroughfare plan, demonstrating overall site circulation. Neighborhood streets for future phases do not need to be included. 
(4)  Connections to the city's thoroughfare network. 
(5)  Connections to the city and/or regional path system. 
(6)  Transit station site and transit corridor link to South Fulton Parkway corridor (if required). 
(7)  Demonstration of allowance for full infrastructure capacity at buildout. This is an accounting to demonstrate that sufficient land area has been reserved for all necessary stormwater infiltration, wastewater treatment (if applicable), and any other infrastructure requirement dependent on development of future phases. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 5.11, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-64—26-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 26-85. - Subdivision improvement guarantees. 
(a)  In order to protect the city and prospective purchasers of and residents in a subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall provide to the city financial security to guarantee the installation of public improvements. The financial security shall be an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of improvements not in compliance. 
(b)  The subdivider's or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
(1)  An escrow of funds with the city; 
(2)  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the city can draw; 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the city can draw; 
(4)  A performance bond for the benefit of the city upon which the city can collect, or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and 
(5)  Any other form of guarantee approved by the city council that will satisfy the objectives of this section. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined by the city, of constructing or installing the improvements and utilities required. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-86. - Limitations on minor subdivisions. 
(a)  Purpose. Minor subdivisions provide certain advantages, such as a shorter application process and less public scrutiny, that tend to favor their use over the filing of major subdivision applications. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that subdividers may seek to divide a parcel via consecutive minor subdivisions instead of filing for a major subdivision. It is the intent of the city council to prohibit the practice of "chain" subdivisions where a parcel divided or created by minor subdivision or major subdivision is further subdivided by the minor subdivision process. Therefore, no parcel subdivided after adoption of this chapter may be subsequently divided by the minor subdivision process. 
(b)  Limitations. Land within a minor subdivision shall not be further divided unless a preliminary plat application is filed and approved as a major subdivision pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  RL district. For the division of land in the RL (rural) zoning district, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Each proposed lot shall contain a minimum area of three acres. 
(2)  Each proposed subdivision shall have no more than one curb cut per every 1,000 linear feet of thoroughfare frontage. Individual lots shall derive access through shared drives. Gravel drives are permitted. 
(3)  Mailboxes shall be clustered at the drive entrance and all thoroughfare address numbers shall be posted, in order, on a sign at the entrance. When access to a lot may be derived through more than one entrance, address number posting is required only at the entrance most efficient for emergency vehicle access to that lot. 
(4)  The subdivision plat recorded with Fulton County clerk of superior court shall contain the following: 
"This Property may not be further subdivided using the Minor Subdivision process." 
This language shall be included whether or not the plat contains minor subdivision lots. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-87. - Major subdivision process. 
The following steps are required for the subdivision of land, except subdivisions that qualify for the minor subdivision process: 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. Applications for subdivision review shall not be accepted by the city unless a pre-application meeting has been held with the director. 
(2)  Concept plan. The applicant may submit a concept plan subsequent to the pre-application meeting. 
(3)  Preliminary plat. Upon approval of the concept plan, a preliminary plat may be submitted according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Development permit/land disturbance permit/construction plans. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, application for development permitting may begin. 
(5)  Final plat. Once the final plat is approved, signed, and recorded with the clerk of superior court, the developer may sell lots. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-88. - Subdivision design. 
(a)  The director shall have the right to encourage design of the subdivision in a manner that will: 
(1)  Enhance traffic circulation and other community needs; 
(2)  Encourage pedestrian traffic to schools, parks, existing and planned greenspace corridors, and neighborhood shopping centers; 
(3)  Reduce impacts on streams and lakes; 
(4)  Reduce unwanted noise, lights on neighboring lots; and 
(5)  Discourage vehicular speeding on local streets. 
(b)  Town, village, and hamlet subdivision design process. 
(1)  The design of towns, villages, and hamlets is guided by two organizing principles: the preservation and integration of existing site features, and the concept of the pedestrian shed. The site analysis is a critical early step in the subdivision process. The site analysis will reveal which land is appropriate for preservation, which is most likely to be agriculturally productive, where physical obstacles to development are located, and the location of unique or otherwise notable features of natural, cultural, or historical value. This process will guide the designation of open space and the alignment of new thoroughfares, and it will identify features that, if incorporated as focal points of the neighborhoods, will add value to the development. 
(2)  Notable site features should form the basis of civic areas and neighborhood centers. Then residential, commercial, and civic areas should be arranged in pedestrian sheds around them. The pedestrian shed represents the physical limits most Americans will walk before choosing to drive. The city's comprehensive plan defines a variety of development forms that are compact, walkable, mixed-use, and ecologically sustainable. Towns, villages, and mixed-use hamlets allow a mix of uses so their residents and customers do not have to drive everywhere. A hamlet may be comprised of a partial or entire pedestrian shed (one-fourth-mile radius) or more than one pedestrian shed. Villages and towns shall be designed and developed as multiple pedestrian sheds. Residential neighborhoods in mixed-use districts and residential hamlets should be organized as pedestrian sheds around playgrounds, parks, civic spaces, commercial nodes, and/or notable site features. 
(3)  Hamlet, village, and town planning process applications shall demonstrate adherence to the following standard planning protocol: 
a.  Step 1. Map existing site resources. 
1.  Identify primary and secondary conservation areas, identify unique features, and analyze soils and slopes to delineate open space. 
2.  Identify and delineate paths, roads, ponds, woods, streams, slopes and wetlands. 
3.  Design the parks, squares, or greens around ponds, wooded areas, specimen trees, or other unique features as much as practicable. 
4.  Define natural boundaries on the site excluding arterials, utility easements, steep slopes (those exceeding 35 percent in 5,000 square feet contiguous areas) and any area of land to be preserved for its natural use. 
b.  Step 2. Identify open space locations for permanent protection. Incorporate notable site features. Plan for resident access. 
c.  Step 3. Locate the commercial center on thoroughfare or intersection with highest traffic. 
d.  Step 4. Structure site into pedestrian sheds. 
1.  Pedestrian sheds form the basis of mixed-use developments. The size and shape of the neighborhood is determined by the pattern of the pedestrian shed. 
2.  Pedestrian shed is equivalent to a five minute walk from edge to center. 
3.  One pedestrian shed should be centered upon the commercial center. 
4.  Additional sheds should cover the remainder of the site with substantial overlap to prevent dilution of each center as a viable mixed use center. 
5.  Can use irregular shape to represent actual walk times. 
e.  Step 5. Adjust pedestrian sheds locations on site. 
1.  Centers of the pedestrian shed must coincide in with natural or manmade features on the site. Site designers should use the features in the landscape as the backbone for public spaces. Examples: 
(i)  Cluster of specimen trees can become a green, park or square. 
(ii)  A hedgerow may present the opportunity to become a tree lined street or avenue. 
(iii)  Existing paths on site can determine the location of streets and roads. 
2.  Where such natural features either do not exist or do not provide such opportunities for becoming public space, introduce a public civic space as the center of each pedestrian shed. 
f.  Step 6. Design street and path network. Connect centers with thoroughfares. 
1.  Subsequent to this point in the design of the district, the natural features have been delineated and designed into the neighborhood design, the main commercial area has been determined and the pedestrian sheds have been outlined. 
2.  Connect the centers with one another by "main" streets or avenues. They should be direct approaches but not necessarily straight. Using the terrain of the site to deflect and slow traffic through the neighborhood. Include pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle access to centers, civic sites, open space features, and other amenities. 
3.  Fill in the areas between the main streets with streets, roads, and paths into a network. Adjust the network to create a pattern of blocks. Such blocks should be smaller when in close proximity to the centers, and larger in the edges. 
4.  Subdivide the blocks into lots. 
g.  Step 7. Detail other neighborhood elements. 
h.  Step 8. Reserve civic sites. 
i.  Step 9. Determine uses of open space network and develop an open space management plan. 
j.  Step 10. Provide covenants, easements, and establish local governance. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-89. - Farmette subdivisions. 
(a)  Description. A farmette is a large-lot residential subdivision of rural land. From each original lot of record, a maximum of three minor subdivision lots, each with a minimum size of three acres, may be created. Then, additional lots with a minimum size of 20 acres may be created from the balance of the property. 
(b)  Design. 
(1)  Farmette lots are a minimum of 20 acres, however up to three minor subdivision lots may be created on any lot of record at the beginning of the farmette subdivision process. 
(2)  Once the base farmette lots are established, lot lines may be moved to increase the size of one or more minor subdivision lots in the same original parcel while reducing the size of one or more farmette lots. No additional lots may be created by this method and no farmette lot may be reduced to a size smaller than the average lot size created from the same original parcel. The size of a farmette lot also may not be increased in this process. 
(3)  Newly-created farmette subdivision lots shall derive access via new subdivision thoroughfares or shared drives on access easements. Unpaved roads or drives are allowed. Access easements for shared drives must be provided and shall be submitted to the director at the time of plat approval. 
(4)  Farmette subdivisions shall have no more than one entrance per 1,000 feet of road frontage. The director may require a 20-foot no-access easement and planting strip along the thoroughfare to ensure that lots fronting on the thoroughfare do not have access thereto. Mailboxes shall be clustered at the entrance unless a new thoroughfare is created, allowing mailboxes to be located adjacent to individual lots. The U.S. Postal Service may require a location for a common delivery box at the entrance to the subdivision. 
(5)  Farmette subdivisions shall be buffered according to chapter 35, zoning. 
(c)  Process. Farmette subdivisions may be created by following the minor subdivision procedures. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-90. - Property owners association. 
(a)  A property owners association, homeowners association, or equivalent body shall be established in all HM, VL, and TN districts. 
(b)  The association shall be responsible for services and maintenance as described herein. 
(c)  The association shall annually assess each property owner an amount sufficient to maintain and replace infrastructure, as necessary. 
(d)  The association shall provide a bond, escrow, or other surety to the city in the amount determined by the city engineer to guarantee the repair, maintenance, operation and management of all private roads, stormwater infrastructure, shared wastewater infrastructure, and designated open space. 
(e)  The association shall be responsible for all repair, maintenance, operation, and management of private roads, stormwater infrastructure, shared wastewater infrastructure, and designated open space, unless an agreement providing for such services by a third party has been filed with and approved by the director. This shall not limit the association from contracting for those services at will while retaining final responsibility for their provision. 
(f)  Failure to adequately manage, operate, or maintain the wastewater or stormwater systems may result in the city assessing a special tax on association members to cover the costs of correcting the problem. 
(g)  If the city council determines that the association is not capable of preventing a catastrophic failure of critical infrastructure under its control, the city may take over the management, operation, maintenance or repair of the system and levy a special assessment on the members of the association. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 6.6, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-91—26-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - THOROUGHFARES 

Sec. 26-109. - General requirements. 
(a)  All thoroughfares shall be appropriate to the proposed density, building height, and uses, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Thoroughfares shall be designed in context with the physical form and desired design speed of the neighborhood or development style through which they pass. The public frontages of thoroughfares that pass from one neighborhood or development style to another should be adjusted accordingly. Thoroughfares shall be designed and constructed with a coordinated program of landscaping and pavement or other surface treatment. 
(c)  All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares, forming a network. Thoroughfares shall be interconnected, affording easier, safer access for emergency vehicles, school buses, and sanitation trucks while distributing traffic more evenly and avoiding excess traffic on certain central residential thoroughfares. 
(d)  Thoroughfare patterns that result in isolated pockets of development with relatively little interconnectivity are strongly discouraged. 
(e)  Thoroughfares shall follow existing contours with a minimum of cut and fill and shall be designed for interparcel access. 
(f)  All newly created lots shall derive access from internal subdivision thoroughfares. 
(g)  All subdivisions shall provide thoroughfare interconnectivity with adjacent properties where possible. 
(h)  Thoroughfares shall reduce impacts on streams and lakes, reduce unwanted noise, lights on neighboring lots; and discourage vehicular speeding on thoroughfares with residential uses. 
(i)  All thoroughfare terminations shall receive special attention in the plan and shall be identified as locations for features such as civic sites, public art, monuments, scenic views, architectural articulation of buildings, or structures of a type and character that respond visually to the location, as approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-110. - Thoroughfare infrastructure. 
(a)  Alignment. 
(1)  Thoroughfare alignment, intersections and jogs. Thoroughfares shall be aligned to join with planned or existing thoroughfares. When a thoroughfare intersection is less than 75 degrees, a roundabout intersection type shall be constructed. Thoroughfares shall enter and exit roundabouts at angles of 75 degrees or greater. Where thoroughfare offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset T-intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet in non-rural areas and 300 feet in rural areas (see figure). Roundabouts should be considered as an alternative solution to such offset problems. 

(2)  Strategically located T-intersections, jogs and offsets that interrupt the visual axis of the street are encouraged. The lots that terminate these vistas are recommended locations for landmark features. That is, buildings or other features of architectural, civic, cultural or historical importance. They can provide closure to urban spaces, aids to navigation, and can designate transitions between neighborhoods. Greater care should be taken with the design of these sites. 
(3)  Continuation of existing thoroughfares and connections. Existing thoroughfares, and their rights-of-way, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The planning commission may require that a major subdivision provide one or more future connections to adjoining subdivisions or unsubdivided tracts. 
(4)  Intersections regulated by traffic signals are discouraged. A street network design that distributes the traffic load is preferred. The use of roundabouts is encouraged where traffic counts are high. When signals cannot be avoided, as in a dense business district street grid, the signals shall be coordinated and timed and the signal controllers shall be able to accommodate remote operation. 
(5)  Thoroughfare plans for future phases of the tract. Where the plat or site plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future thoroughfare system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision consideration may be required by the director and, if required, shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer. 
(6)  Marginal access thoroughfares. Whenever a major subdivision is proposed abutting the right-of-way of a U.S. or state highway, a marginal access thoroughfare approximately parallel and adjacent to such right-of-way may be required at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such marginal access thoroughfare and highway right-of-way. The city may also require a 20-foot no-access easement and planting strip along the highway or boulevard thoroughfare to ensure that lots fronting on said thoroughfare do not have access thereto. (See Figure.) 

(b)  Visibility. 
(1)  Minimum vertical. All local roads with 25 m.p.h. designs shall be connected by vertical crest curves of a minimum length not less than 12 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. All local roads with a 25 m.p.h. design speed shall be connected by vertical sag curves of minimum length not less than 26 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred. In any case, the sight distance shall meet the minimum requirements of this article. 
a.  In proposed approaches of new streets to intersections with existing streets, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the back of the curb of the intersecting street. 
b.  In approaches to intersections internal to residential subdivisions, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding five percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the center point of the intersection. 
(2)  Minimum horizontal. Radii of centerline curvature: 
a.  Street designed for 35 m.p.h.: 200 feet. 
b.  Other streets: 100 feet. 
(3)  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents: 
a.  Streets designed for 35 m.p.h.: 100 feet. 
b.  Other streets: 50 feet. 
(4)  Intersection visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the operating speed of the road as determined by the department of public works. Intersection sight distance shall be no less than the following: 
280 feet for 25 m.p.h. 
335 feet for 30 m.p.h. 
390 feet for 35 m.p.h. 
445 feet for 40 m.p.h. 
500 feet for 45 m.p.h. 
610 feet for 55 m.p.h. 
a.  Minimum horizontal visibility shall be measured on centerline. 
b.  When a proposed curb cut intersects an existing roadway, the minimum visibility shall be provided as follows: 
1.  When measuring in the horizontal plane, intersection sight distance is determined with the following assumptions. The driver's eye location is to be assumed at the center line of the exiting lane of the proposed curb cut behind the stop bar. The object location is to be assumed at the centerline of the closest oncoming lane for each direction. 
2.  When measuring in the vertical plane, intersection sight distance is determined with an assumed height of driver's eye and an assumed height of object of 3.5 feet. 
3.  When measuring in either plane, the line of sight must remain in the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, indemnification agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
(5)  Stopping sight distance visibility requirements. Roadways and their intersections shall be designed such that proper stopping sight distance is maintained. Minimum sight distance shall be determined by the design speed of the proposed road as determined by the department of public works. Stopping sight distance along a roadway shall be no less than the following: 
155 feet for 25 m.p.h. 
200 feet for 30 m.p.h. 
250 feet for 35 m.p.h. 
a.  Minimum vertical visibility for stopping sight distance along the roadway shall be determined by measuring between two points of which the height of the driver's eye shall be assumed at 3.5 feet to an assumed object which is two feet in height. The line of sight must remain within the proposed dedicated right-of-way, unless sufficient easements, maintenance agreements, and indemnification agreements are provided, or additional right-of-way is dedicated. 
b.  Minimum horizontal visibility for stopping sight distance shall be measured on centerline. 
(6)  Sight visibility triangle. At the intersection of a thoroughfare and a driveway or the intersection of two thoroughfares, a triangle defined by the first 20 feet of property line along the thoroughfare or driveway beginning at the intersection of such property lines shall be kept free of visual obstructions greater than three feet in height. The director may adjust these standards where topography or other conditions pose challenges to visibility that require more stringent requirements. 
(c)  Infrastructure specifications. 
(1)  Grading and stabilization of thoroughfare rights-of-way. When a new public thoroughfare is proposed, all trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the thoroughfare right-of-way, except in cases where trees are required to be preserved by the city arborist or by the approved plans. All thoroughfares shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on plans. All unsurfaced, disturbed portions of thoroughfare rights-of-way shall be stabilized by seeding, fertilizing, and mulching or by another equally effective method as approved by the director. 
(2)  Thoroughfare grades. No thoroughfare grade shall be less than one percent. No thoroughfare grade for a highway or boulevard thoroughfare shall exceed eight percent. No other thoroughfare grade shall exceed 12 percent, unless the director finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is necessary, in which case the thoroughfare grade shall not exceed 16 percent. Grades between 12 percent and 16 percent shall not exceed a length of 180 feet. No unpaved thoroughfare grade shall exceed eight percent. 
(3)  Bridges. Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards. 
(4)  Dead-end thoroughfares and cul-de-sacs. 
a.  Cul-de-sac thoroughfares shall be prohibited except when they are stubbed out for future connections or as approved by the director. The maximum length of such thoroughfares shall be 600 feet in non-rural areas and 1,200 feet in rural areas. Street extensions that stub out to provide future connection through protected open space and do not serve any lots shall not be included in these measurements. No cul-de-sac shall serve more than ten lots. 
b.  Thoroughfares that are planned to continue at some future date may provide a temporary cul-de-sac with adequate turn around facilities as required by the director. 
c.  Wherever cul-de-sacs or hammerhead turnarounds are unavoidable (typically for topographic reasons) they must always be provided with bicycle or pedestrian linkages to other nearby thoroughfares or to a neighborhood trail system. 
(5)  Blocks specific to all non-rural areas. 
a.  The maximum length for a block is 600 linear feet with the total perimeter length not to exceed 1,680 linear feet and the total area of a block shall not exceed 3.30 acres. 
b.  Any block face exceeding 600 linear feet shall include a dedicated thoroughfare or open space providing through-vehicular and/or pedestrian access. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-111. - Thoroughfare types and design. 
(a)  Herein are established permissible thoroughfare types: 
(1)  Rear alley (RA). A vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. 
(2)  Road (RD). A local, rural and in some cases non-rural thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity. 
(3)  Street (ST). A local non-rural thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. 
(4)  Commercial street (CS). A non-rural thoroughfare of medium speed and capacity fronted with commercial uses. 
(5)  Avenue (AV) and commercial avenue (CSAV). A non-rural thoroughfare of medium speed and high capacity. A commercial avenue is fronted with commercial uses. 
(6)  Boulevard (BV). A non-rural thoroughfare of medium speeds and high capacity fronted with commercial uses. 
(7)  Highway (HW). A state-designated thoroughfare with high travel speeds and high capacity. Access to a highway requires state DOT review. 
(b)  Herein are established transportation provisions: 
(1)  Bicycle lane (BL). A dedicated lane for cycling within a moderate-speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping. 
(2)  Bicycle route (BR). A thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds. 
(3)  Bicycle trail (BT). A bicycle way running independently of a vehicular thoroughfare. 
(4)  Path (PT). A pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the urban sidewalk network. 
(c)  Thoroughfares shall be designed as depicted in the following tables. Additional provisions and widths may be permitted as approved by the director. 
Table 26-111-1. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Rear Lane and Rear Alley 

Table 26-111-2. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Roads 

Table 26-111-3. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Roads and Streets 

Table 26-111-4. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Streets 

Table 26-111-5. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Streets 

Table 26-111-6. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Commercial Streets 

Table 26-111-7. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Commercial Streets 

Table 26-111-8. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Commercial Streets 

Table 26-111-9. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Avenues 

Table 26-111-10. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Boulevards 

Table 26-111-11. Thoroughfare Assemblies: Boulevards 

Table 26-111-12. Thoroughfare Lane Widths 

R: Rural 
N: Neighborhood 
C: Core 
Development Contexts: 
Rural: Traditional rural development style as found in the city's RL district or open space. 
Neighborhood: Low to moderate density, low rise, predominately residential development style. 
Core: the densest development areas in the city. Medium to high rise construction, significant commercial uses, along with multifamily and office buildings. 
Table 26-111-13. Vehicular Lane and Parking Assemblies 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-112. - Unpaved thoroughfares standards. 
(a)  The unpaved thoroughfares may be approved for road or street thoroughfare types. Commercial streets, avenues, and boulevards shall be paved. 
(b)  The maximum number of lots to be served by an unpaved thoroughfare is 12. 
(c)  Thoroughfares planned to serve commercial uses shall be paved in non-rural areas. This is not to be interpreted to prevent unpaved drives on commercial property. 
(d)  The grade of any unpaved thoroughfare shall not exceed ten percent. 
(e)  All intersections of unpaved thoroughfares with paved thoroughfares require a 20-foot paved apron at the intersection, with a concrete transition strip not less than 12 inches in length where the apron meets the unpaved thoroughfare. 
(f)  When unpaved thoroughfares slope upward from an intersection with a paved thoroughfare, the profile of the unpaved thoroughfare shall flatten to a slope no greater than two percent for a minimum of 20 feet before the apron. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-113. - Curb cuts and access specifications. 
(a)  Entrance improvement specifications. 
(1)  Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary acceleration and/or deceleration lanes and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the state department of transportation, as applicable, or the director, in accordance with applicable state or city specifications. 
(2)  All entrances or exits of any thoroughfare or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation and the director prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
(3)  All entrances or exits of any thoroughfare or driveway, public or private, from or to any city thoroughfare shall be approved by the director prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
(4)  When located along highway, boulevard or avenue thoroughfares (see section 26-111), curb cuts are prohibited. 
(b)  The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: 
(1)  The location of existing or planned median breaks; 
(2)  Separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; 
(3)  Separation requirements between other entrances; 
(4)  The need to provide shared access with other sites; 
(5)  The need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the thoroughfare; 
(6)  Lot frontage and access do not necessarily have to be along or front the same public thoroughfare, if approved by the director; and 
(7)  The minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off of the site safely and efficiently. 
(c)  Access along and near divided highways. Where a divided highway exists or is planned, the following access standards shall be met: 

 
(d)  Curb cut specifications. No curb cut or access driveway shall be permitted to be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting thoroughfare. Curb cuts or access driveways shall be no narrower than 22 feet from back of curb to back of curb, or 12 feet in the case of one-way streets when approved by the director. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the director. The director may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
(e)  Gates. Gates controlling access to more than one lot shall be prohibited, except in the case of an approved farmette subdivision (see section 26-89). This shall not be interpreted to limit gates controlling access to multiple lots under a single ownership, such as, but not limited to, a multi-parcel farm or a rural homestead. 
(f)  Interparcel connections. 
(1)  New development that contains or is intended to contain more than one building or use on site shall provide connections so that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using the highway or major thoroughfare. Where possible and practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
(2)  When land is subdivided, created parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future thoroughfares and provide access to those areas not presently served by thoroughfares. Internal subdivision thoroughfare and pedestrian path networks shall connect to the thoroughfare and pedestrian path networks of adjoining subdivisions where possible. Future access to adjoining undeveloped property shall be provided via stub-out thoroughfares and paths. Such access shall be provided at least one per 1,000 feet of perimeter. 
(3)  Where district buffers are required, thoroughfare stub-outs shall extend through the buffer to the property line. When connecting to an existing thoroughfare network in a neighboring subdivision, thoroughfares shall extend laterally through the buffer to connect with existing stub-outs. 
(4)  The subdivider shall submit documentation of the necessary easements providing for access to a public thoroughfare for proposed lots that front only on an existing, documented, paved private thoroughfare or driveway. 
(5)  Alleys are encouraged as a means towards interparcel connectivity. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible; but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities. Service access shall be provided to nonresidential developments for off-thoroughfare loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-114. - Thoroughfare lighting. 
When required, thoroughfare lights shall be provided in accordance with city specifications by the developers of a subdivision prior to the approval of a final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the city and by the utility company that will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. The fixtures shall be mounted no more than 30 feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length or power to place light over the thoroughfare. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the director. Fixtures shall be located no more than 500 feet apart, unless approved by the director, and, when provided, at least one light shall be located at each public or private thoroughfare intersection within the subdivision or land development. 
(1)  Pedestrian lighting shall be provided along all commercial streets (section 26-111). Light posts for pedestrian lighting shall not exceed a height of 15 feet from finished grade. 
(2)  The developer shall pay all costs for poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation of thoroughfare lights, as well as arrange an agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. Along private thoroughfares, the property owner's association may assume the responsibility and make the monthly payments to the power company for electrical energy for each thoroughfare light after 50 percent of the lots in that development phase have been sold. Along public thoroughfares, the city may assume the responsibility and make the monthly payments to the power company for electrical energy for each thoroughfare light only after these requirements have been met and improvements accepted by the governing authority. Maintenance and operation costs of thoroughfare lights will be assumed by the city no earlier than two years after lights have been installed. 
(3)  Lighting standards. 
a.  Cobra, shoebox light fixtures and neon lighting are prohibited. 
b.  Light fixtures shall be designed and located to minimize spillage onto adjoining properties. 
c.  The lighting fixtures of exposed rooftop parking shall be concealed by a parapet wall and shall not be seen from surrounding thoroughfares. 
d.  All lighting must conform to this section and the night sky ordinance in the zoning ordinance. 
e.  Off-site spill. Lighting levels at property lines shall be a maximum measurement as listed: 
1.  RL district: 0.5 footcandles. 
2.  HM districts: 1.0 footcandle. 
3.  VL district: 2.0 footcandles. 
4.  TN district: 2.0 footcandles. 
Table 26-114-1. Thoroughfare Lighting 

Table 26-114-2. Public Darkness 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-115. - Thoroughfare signs. 
(a)  Signs for thoroughfare names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards shall be provided as directed by the director. Thoroughfare signs on exterior/boundary thoroughfares shall be installed by the city with the developer paying a proportionate share determined by the city. Thoroughfare signs for interior thoroughfares of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the subdivider or developer's expense by the subdivider or developer, subject to the approval of the director. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in standards and specifications adopted by the city, thoroughfare signs shall meet the following specifications. Signs shall be constructed of aluminum sheets with reflective backgrounds. Information on the thoroughfare name signs shall be readable from both sides of the sign. Signs shall be installed on a steel post or another mounting system as approved by the director. The vertical distance from the thoroughfare elevation to the bottom of the sign face shall be seven feet with a minimum burial depth of three feet. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-116. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Curbs and gutters shall be installed if required by the director in accordance with standards and specifications of the city. 
(b)  Curbs and gutters are required for all thoroughfares when sidewalks are required by this chapter, except in rural areas. All nonresidential subdivisions and land developments must have curbs and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots. 
(c)  When property fronting on an existing city thoroughfare in non-rural areas is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or land development uses said existing thoroughfare for access, then curb and gutter shall be required along said thoroughfare along the entire property frontage of said thoroughfare except when lack of curb and gutter is desirable to enhance rural character, as determined by the director. 
(d)  Curbs shall be granite or concrete which shall be class A 3,000 psi strength at 28 days. The typical curb minimum section shall be six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches (see figure.) 

(e)  All thoroughfares not required to include curbs and gutters shall be graded, paved (if applicable), and drained to meet all construction and drainage standards for ditches, slopes, and grassing according to specifications established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-117. - Sidewalks, landscaping, and amenities. 
(a)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed as specified in section 26-111. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be required when land developments and subdivisions are located within one mile of a public school. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-of-way of thoroughfares and shall parallel the thoroughfare pavement as much as possible; provided, however, the director may permit or encourage sidewalks to be designed and constructed so that they meander around permanent obstructions or deviate from a linear pattern for design purposes. In areas of dense vegetation or steep slopes, or when more than 800 feet from activity nodes, single side sidewalks, or alternative sidewalk routings away from the thoroughfare, are permissible subject to approval of the director. 
(b)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Thoroughfare trees shall be planted on both sides of all thoroughfares where required per section 26-111. Trees required on public frontages may be permitted to relocate to open spaces when such areas are located within 100 feet from where the trees would otherwise be required 
(2)  Landscape areas shall be provided as defined in section 26-111. Except along greenways, a minimum four-foot-wide landscape area shall be provided along a minimum of one side of all thoroughfares per section 26-111. 
(3)  Street trees shall have a minimum 270 square feet of permeable surface per tree in the rural areas and a minimum 25 square feet of permeable surface and 250 square feet of structural soil per tree in non-rural areas. 
(c)  Amenities. Where provided, lighting, signage, benches, recycling bins, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, and other thoroughfare furniture shall be compatible with the surrounding area in material, color, finish and architectural style. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-118. - Bicycle and multi-use paths. 
(a)  A bicycle network consisting of bicycle trails, multiuse trails, bicycle routes and bicycle lanes should be provided throughout the community as indicated in Table 26-118-1. The community bicycle network shall be connected to existing or proposed regional networks when such networks exist or are planned within 2,000 feet of the district. The city may require the purchase of an easement to make such connections possible. 
(b)  A multiuse path network constructed to the city's multiuse path standards and connected with proposed and existing path networks in the city. The city may require the purchase of an easement to make such connections possible. Where connections are not possible to existing or planned path networks, the developer shall stub out path terminations at the rate of one per 1,000 feet of district perimeter. No more than 30 percent of the paths within an individual district that make up this network shall be aligned with automobile thoroughfares. 
(c)  Bicycle infrastructure shall also include bicycle parking facilities of the appropriate type and appropriate proximity to uses as indicated in Tables 26-118-2 and 26-118-3, where "short-term" parking serves uses such as retail and service commercial, "day parking" serves employment centers such as office and industrial uses, and "26-hour/overnight parking" serves residential and hospitality uses. 
Table 26-118-1. Bikeway and Facility Type Summary 

Table 26-118-2. Parking Types 

Table 26-118-3. General Location Standards 

(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.10, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-119. - Private thoroughfares. 
(a)  Private thoroughfares permitted. Private thoroughfares may be permitted within subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this section. Applications for approval of private thoroughfares shall be considered by the director at the time of preliminary plat approval. The director may impose conditions on the approval of private thoroughfares to ensure various public safety purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private thoroughfares. No final plat involving a private thoroughfare shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Construction plans required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private thoroughfare or alter an existing private thoroughfare or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of construction plans from the director and a development permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Standards. All private thoroughfares shall be constructed to all standards for public thoroughfares as required by this chapter for public thoroughfares, applicable construction specifications of the city, and as approved by the director. 
(d)  Thoroughfare names and signs. Private thoroughfares shall be named, subject to the approval of the director. The subdivider of land involving a private thoroughfare shall install thoroughfare signs containing the thoroughfare name, as approved by the director. The sign signifying the private thoroughfare may be required by the city to be a different color than that of thoroughfare signs provided for public thoroughfares, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
(e)  Easements. Easements for private thoroughfares shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private thoroughfare. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare by section 26-111, thoroughfare assemblies, for the type of public thoroughfare most closely resembling the proposed private thoroughfare. Easements for private thoroughfares shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by local land use regulations. In the cases of private thoroughfares, the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the private thoroughfare shall either; 
(1)  Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private thoroughfare extends to the centerline of the private thoroughfare; no lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private thoroughfare; or 
(2)  Shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
(f)  Maintenance. The city shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve thoroughfares, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private thoroughfares. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the clerk of the superior court of Fulton County shall be required for any private thoroughfare and other improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private thoroughfares. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms. 
(1)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision of seven or more lots fronting on a private thoroughfare. 
(2)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(3)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private thoroughfare. 
(4)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private thoroughfare. 
(5)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(6)  The city may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private thoroughfares, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the director into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private thoroughfares and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
(g)  Specifications for final plats involving private thoroughfares. The director shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a private thoroughfare unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(1)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this section (a copy of the applicable stamped deed book pages must be supplied with the application). 
WARNING, the City of Chattahoochee Hills has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the Private Thoroughfares, drainage Improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose Access and Utility Easement or Easements for Private Thoroughfares shown on this Plat. 
(2)  Grant of easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement shown on this plat for private thoroughfare is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the city, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
_______ 
Signature of Property Owner 
(3)  If a dedication of water and sewer lines is accepted by the city, the following certificate of dedication shall appear on the face of the plat: 
Certificate of Dedication. All water and Sewer lines installed within the general purpose public Access and Utility Easement(s) shown on this Plat for Private Thoroughfare(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Chattahoochee Hills or its assignee. 
_______ 
Signature of Property Owner. 
(h)  Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgement of private responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private thoroughfare in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private thoroughfare construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Thoroughfare and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility: 
(I)/(We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the Lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction _______ (insert address or attach legal description). (I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the Lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and Maintenance of any Private Thoroughfare and drainage facilities serving the Lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other Lots in this Plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorney's fees. (I)/(We) further understand that the City has no obligation to assist with the Maintenance and improvement of the Private Thoroughfare, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public Access and Utility Easement for the Private Thoroughfare serving the Lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a Building permit for a principal Building on the Lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
___________ 
Purchaser 
___________ 
Purchaser 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.11, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-120. - Dedications of thoroughfares and public lands. 
(a)  No thoroughfare or public land shall be dedicated to the city without prior approval by a vote of the city council. 
(b)  Upon completion of public improvement construction, the subdivider or land developer shall notify the director and request an inspection. The director shall inspect all public improvements and shall notify the subdivider or land developer by mail of nonacceptance or preliminary acceptance. If the public improvements are not acceptable, the reason for non-acceptance shall be stated and corrective measures shall be outlined in a letter of notification. Upon notification, the subdivider or land developer shall correct all deficiencies identified in the non-acceptance letter within the time limit established by the director. Once deficiencies are corrected, the subdivider or land developer shall again request inspection in writing. Acceptance of public improvements required by this chapter to be approved by the city council shall be forwarded to the city council by the director following approval. 
(c)  Subdivision thoroughfares and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted and dedicated by the city only upon the delivery to the city council of the general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the city council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further, that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  All slope, drainage and utility easements, as well as necessary thoroughfare rights-of-way (as determined by the director) shall be provided by the subdivider at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 7.12, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-121—26-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENERGY AND SUSTAINABILITY 

Sec. 26-139. - Drainage and stormwater management. 
(a)  Light imprint stormwater management methods shall be used. Stormwater management methods employed shall be appropriate for the development intensity of the neighborhood. See Table 26-139. 
(b)  General requirements. An adequate drainage system, separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all subdivisions and land developments. Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer or land surveyor. Stormwater should be detained on site when possible. The city may require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or detention to mitigate the stormwater and drainage impacts of the proposed subdivisions and land developments. The planning commission shall not approve any preliminary plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for stormwater and floodwater runoff channels or basins as determined by the director. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or development permit issued for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate system of drainage and stormwater management. 
(c)  Method of design and capacity. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the rational method, or other methods as approved by the city, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area within the site and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. Capacity for a ten-year storm or rain shall be provided for all thoroughfare drainage structures such as catch basin, inlets cross-drains, etc. Capacity for a 100-year frequency storm event shall be provided for all main drainage structures such as retention basins, principal storm sewers, and all types of flood protection works. 
(d)  District-wide site design that incorporates stormwater detention, retention, and infiltration in the common areas or open space is preferred. Shallow stormwater features that are designed to appear natural and that serve alternate uses in dry periods can be site amenities and should be incorporated when possible. 
Table 26-139. Light Imprint Stormwater Matrix 
LIGHT IMPRINT STORM DRAINAGE MATRIX 

(e)  Location of drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be located in the thoroughfare right-of-way or access easement where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications of the city. Catch basins shall be located at low points of thoroughfares. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within thoroughfare rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the thoroughfare right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the thoroughfare. 
(f)  Discharge. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Stormwater shall not be discharged directly to perennial streams. It shall be directed toward natural drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
(g)  Grading and site drainage. Lots or land development sites shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public thoroughfares. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
(h)  Cross-drainpipes. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the thoroughfare by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, the design of which shall be approved by the city. Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width thoroughfare and the required slopes. Cross-drainpipes shall have head walls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Pipe installed within the right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All storm drainpipes shall be minimum 18 inches in diameter. Storm sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than one percent. 
(i)  Drop inlets. Drop inlets shall be generally three-foot by three-foot boxes with two-foot by three-foot grates unless otherwise specified by the city. 
(j)  Easements. Where an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek, stream or other drainage way crosses a subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer shall provide an easement sufficient for drainage and maintenance. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the city. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a stormwater or drainage easement of at least 20 feet shall be provided. 
(k)  Grading and drainage plan. Preliminary plat applications shall submit a conceptual grading and drainage plan that demonstrates minimal disturbance and, to the extent consistent with applicable local, state, and federal law, stormwater management primarily through retention and percolation on site and adherence to light imprint stormwater design. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 8.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-140. - Water. 
(a)  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a water supply capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. No permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate water supply, as determined by the city engineer. 
(b)  Water main requirements. When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, according to specifications of the city. All water mains shall normally be at least six inches in diameter except that pipe of lesser size may be used if properly looped and adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with standards established by the Southeastern Fire Underwriters Association. Pipe of less than four inches shall not be used except in unusual cases. Water lines shall be installed at least 30 inches below grade. Water mains within subdivisions and land developments must be provided with connections to each lot in the subdivision and each land development, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(c)  Wells. If a county and/or municipal water supply is not available to the subdivision or land development at the time of constructing improvements for a subdivision or land development, then the subdivider or developer shall provide an adequate alternative water source and an adequate water storage facility. In subdivisions or land developments in an RL or HM-LDR district with a net residential density of two-thirds unit per acre or less and when a public water system is not available as determined by the city, individual wells may be used in a manner so that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision or to the land development. When individual wells are proposed to be used for water supply, water samples shall be submitted to the county health department for its approval, and individual wells shall be approved by the county health department. Approvals shall be submitted to the director prior to final subdivision plat approval. 
(d)  Community water system. If a county and/or municipal water supply is not available to the subdivision or land development at the time of constructing improvements for a subdivision or land development, then the subdivider or developer shall provide an adequate alternative water source and an adequate water storage facility. Any community water system, if permitted, shall provide a minimum flow of 400 gallons per day per each lot platted, whether or not each lot is to be immediately developed; shall be sanitary; and shall have a minimum pressure of 45 pounds per square inch at each lot in the subdivision or each land development to be served. For all common non-public water supply systems, acceptable management, maintenance, and distribution policies and procedures shall be established. These policies and procedures shall be required to guarantee the provision of adequate supplies to each perspective lot owner on a continuing, ongoing basis, and to provide acceptable means for repairs and unforeseen events. The community water system plan shall be approved by the county health department and a letter of approval from the state department of natural resources shall accompany the final plat or land development application. 
(e)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions except those permitted to be served by individual on-site wells or community wells that serve six or fewer homes. The agency having jurisdiction may permit sprinklered homes or businesses as an alternative when sufficient flow or pressure for hydrants is unavailable. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the city fire department. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and within 400 feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the fire department. Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. The agency having jurisdiction (AHJ) shall determine the sufficiency of hydrant type, placement, and hydrant pressure. To eliminate future thoroughfare openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a thoroughfare within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 8.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-141. - Sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. Each subdivision and land development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal facilities. No permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate method of wastewater collection and treatment. Sewer systems are governed by the county and higher authorities. 
(b)  Connection to public sewerage system. When a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, as determined by the city, the subdivider or land developer shall connect with it and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision or to each land development. 
(c)  Cluster systems. A cluster system is an individual subsurface sewage disposal system, which in whole or component part serves more than one property, dwelling, commercial unit or other realty improvement. Cluster systems shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Cluster systems shall be licensed by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division (EPD) or the county department of environmental health and shall satisfactorily comply with all terms of the license. 
(2)  The system shall be licensed and fully operational before final plat approval. No lot served by the system shall be sold nor shall any building permit be issued before the cluster system is approved for operation. 
(3)  The disposal field shall not be located on any 100 year floodplain or within 200 feet of any groundwater recharge area. 
(4)  Ownership, maintenance and operation of a cluster system. 
a.  Upon transfer of title by the developer, a homeowners' association comprised of the owners of each lot serviced by the system, or a separate authority, shall own, maintain, operate, repair and replace, system components located outside of individual property lot lines. In the event the homeowners' association includes owners whose properties are not serviced by the system, those owners shall not be responsible for maintenance, operation, repairs and replacement of the system. The homeowners' association shall not be dissolved and may not dispose of the system, by sale or otherwise, without the prior approval of the city. 
b.  The by-laws, membership assessments and dues, and methods of enforcement and collection of delinquent assessments and dues of the homeowners' association insofar as they pertain to maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the cluster system shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to or as a condition of final plat approval. 
c.  A separate capital account dedicated to replacement of the system based upon the useful life of its component parts and funded through association assessments shall be established and approved by the city prior to final plat approval. The owner of the system shall provide to the city a bond, escrow, or equivalent security valued at the difference between the cost of replacing the system and balance of the capital account. 
d.  Declaration of covenants, conditions, restrictions and by-laws shall be recorded with the Fulton County clerk of superior court in the book for the recording of deeds, which recording shall be prior to final plat approval or the first conveyance of any realty improvements to be serviced by a cluster system. 
e.  The city shall not be responsible for any dry sewer lines installed as part of major subdivision approval and used for the transfer or pumping of sewage to any cluster system. During the period of such use, the legal entity responsible for maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the system shall remain fully responsible for the system. 
f.  Prior to final plat approval, the owner of a cluster system shall place with the city an escrow, performance bond, or other security approved by the city for two years of operating costs. In the event the owner fails to operate the system within the terms of the EPD license, the city may assume control of the system and draw upon this security. The city may also assume all billing for sewer service and spend all money collected to manage, operate, maintain, or repair the system. 
g.  Prior to final plat approval, the owner of a cluster system shall submit to the city a manual explaining in detail the operation and maintenance of the system. Such a manual shall be kept at all times by the owner and shall be updated as necessary. Copies of any and all updates shall be provided to the city. 
h.  The owner of a cluster system approved by the city shall, as a continuing condition of approval, engage and maintain the services of a sewage treatment plant operator, licensed in the state, to provide the necessary expertise for the maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the system. The city shall receive at least 60 days' notice of the cancellation, termination, expiration or non-renewal of the licensed operator's contract with the owner. These requirements may be waived by the city, upon a showing of good cause by the owner. The licensed operator shall be subject to the requirement of this chapter pertaining to maintenance, inspections, reporting and operation. 
i.  All costs of any testing or monitoring of a cluster system or its components shall be borne by the applicant or association, as the case may be. 
(5)  Access to cluster systems. 
a.  As a condition to approval of a cluster system, the applicant shall provide to the city all necessary easements (by deed) granting the city and its authorized agent access to all properties upon which the system is located and/or which the system services for the purpose of monitoring and inspecting the system and, where necessary, disconnecting a component of the system in order to protect the integrity of the system as a whole. This provision shall not be construed to be in derogation of any authority to enter premises the city and its authorized agent may otherwise have by reason of statute, rule or ordinance. 
b.  As a condition to approval of a cluster system, the applicant shall provide to the owner of the system, and its successors, assigns and agents, all necessary easements (by deed) granting the owner access to all properties upon which the system is located and/or which the system services for the purpose of monitoring, inspecting, and pumping and cleaning the system in order to protect the integrity of the system as a whole. 
(d)  Septic tanks. Where individual on-site wastewater disposal systems are allowed and proposed, individual lot sizes and shapes must exhibit appropriate regard for the peculiar health, drainage, and maintenance characteristics on the site. Additionally, detailed soil tests may be required in order to verify the ability of the lots to safely contain and dispose of septic system effluent. All septic tanks and on-site wastewater disposal systems are subject to the approval of the county health department. The minimum lot size for a septic system is one acre (43,560 square feet). No building permit shall be issued for a lot with a septic system, or a proposed septic system, without the approval of the county department of environmental health. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued without a final inspection by and approval of the county department of environmental health, and receipt of as-built drawings of the septic system. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 8.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-142. - Utilities. 
(a)  In all HM, VL, and TN districts, all utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. 
(b)  Whenever existing utility facilities in HM, VL, and TN districts (other than major transmission lines) are located above ground, except when existing with public thoroughfares rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. Transmission lines should also be relocated underground. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities, private and public, and such easements shall be at least ten feet wide. 
(c)  When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities along the rear lot lines of a subdivision, lot, or land development site, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided alongside lot lines with satisfactory access. 
(d)  Utility thoroughfare crossings indicated on the plat or construction plans to be buried shall be installed before the thoroughfare is paved. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 8.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-143. - Oversizing of improvements and utilities. 
(a)  The subdivider or land developer shall construct such oversized improvements and utilities that the city determines are necessary, provided that the subdivider or land developer shall not be obligated for the additional cost of improvements and utilities that are not uniquely required for that development, and provided the subdivider agrees to a proposal by the city to share in the cost arrangements for over-sizing improvements and utilities. 
(b)  A formula may be developed by the city to provide for a sharing of the cost of other improvements needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the improvements are necessary to serve future subdivisions or developments in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 8.5, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 26-144—26-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPEN SPACE 

Sec. 26-170. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to: 
(1)  Ensure preservation of open space within developments; 
(2)  Provide flexibility to allow for creativity in developments; 
(3)  Minimize the environmental and visual impacts of new development on critical natural resources and historically and culturally significant sites and structures; 
(4)  Provide an interconnected network of permanent open space; 
(5)  Encourage a more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features; 
(6)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation; 
(7)  Enhance the community character; 
(8)  Permit clustering of houses and structures which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility lines; 
(9)  Encourage thoroughfare design that controls traffic speeds and creates thoroughfare inter-connectivity; and 
(10)  Promote construction of convenient and accessible walking trails and bike paths both within a subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(b)  Open space for all developments shall be as regulated in chapter 35, zoning. 
(c)  Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of a conservation easement. The open space shall be designated on the preliminary plat and recorded on the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 9.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-171. - Open space networks configuration. 
(a)  Properties designated as open space shall be configured to create or maintain a network of open space. 
(b)  No more than five percent of the preservation area shall be fewer than 50 feet in width. 
(c)  No open space shall share a lot with any use not listed on Table 35-265. Any such unlisted use shall be separated from the open space by a parcel boundary and a thoroughfare or permanent fence line. 
(d)  All open space networks shall provide connectivity to any common areas within the development and to any adjacent public places, paths or rights-of-way. 
(e)  Paths located in floodplains, stream buffers, or within 25 feet of wetlands shall be constructed of pervious materials. 
(f)  Where path networks cross internal subdivision thoroughfares or public thoroughfares, access points shall be directly across from each other. 
(g)  Crossings and access points shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and motorists and may include traffic control devices, bridges and tunnels. 
(h)  Open space preservation areas, as defined in chapter 35, zoning, shall include the following features when they are present on the site: 
(1)  Habitats for endangered or threatened species as defined by the state department of natural resources; 
(2)  Wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the county soil survey prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service, or a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(3)  Alluvial soils identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and 100-year floodplain; 
(4)  Rivers, streams, lakes, existing ponds, naturalistic stormwater management ponds/facilities with pedestrian amenities, creeks, including, but not limited to, blue line tributaries and state waters; 
(5)  Riparian zones equal to any required stream buffers and improvement setbacks; 
(6)  Existing slopes greater than 25 percent on average with a site area greater than 5,000 square feet identified as part of a site analysis conducted by a registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect; and 
(7)  Historic and/or archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 9.2, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 16-03-149, § 1, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 26-172. - Open space protection and maintenance. 
(a)  Open space areas required by city ordinance shall be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement. The city reserves the right to enforce all such required conservation easements. 
(b)  Such conservation easements shall: 
(1)  Clearly delineate conservation areas; 
(2)  Describe the features of the subject property that shall be permanently protected in accordance with the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
(3)  List the parties, that is, the owners of the property, the holder of the easement and the city as a third party beneficiary with rights to enforce the easement if the city is not the holder; 
(4)  Specify how the easement may be transferred as in the case of the dissolution of a homeowners association; 
(5)  Clearly identify the boundaries of the property by survey and a metes and bounds legal description; 
(6)  Clearly list restrictions; 
(7)  Provide for inspections of the property by the owner, the holder of the easement and the city; 
(8)  Provide for maintenance of the property; 
(9)  Be duly recorded with the clerk of superior court prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit; 
(10)  Provide for amendments only with the express written permission of the holder of the easement, the city, and a majority of the property owners. Amendments to the easement shall be filed and shall be recorded in superior court; and 
(11)  Be shown on the final plat. 
(c)  Open space required for a given phase of development shall be preserved according to the following minimum standards. Failure to meet these standards may result in the city withholding further development permits, building permits, and/or certificates of occupancy in the entire development until the standards are met. 
(1)  When building permits have been issued on 80 percent of the density units allocated to an individual phase, then 80 percent of the open space required for that phase shall be permanently protected. 
(2)  When building permits have been issued on 100 percent of the density units allocated to an individual phase or when the master developer of the phase is no longer actively marketing lots in that phase and there have been no sales of lots to home owners, home builders, or commercial developers within the preceding 180 days, then 100 percent of the open space required for that phase shall be permanently protected. 
(d)  Open space may be maintained and/or improved through reforestation, pasture management, buffer replantings, stream bank protection and wetlands management or by other acceptable means as described in the zoning ordinance. The owner of the open space shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space. The city may require a bond for maintenance. 
(e)  An open space management plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application and must be approved by the director before final plat approval. The open space management plan shall include the anticipated ownership (whether turned over to the homeowners association or property owners association, dedicated to the city, etc.) and the anticipated use of all protected open space parcels, along with a financial plan that demonstrates that the management expenses, taxes, and insurance, will be covered by income derived from the property or some other source of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 9.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 26-173. - Open space ownership. 
(a)  All open space shall be permanently protected and held in fee simple interest by a qualified conservation organization as defined in the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq., or a homeowners association established in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners Association Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq., or a land trust, or the city, or another organization as approved by the city council. If accepted by the city, the property must be in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(b)  Open space that is owned by a homeowners association is subject to the following: 
(1)  Prior to the approval of the final plat, the developer of a subdivision shall submit a description of the homeowners association, including by-laws, and methods for maintaining the open space. 
(2)  Membership of each lot owner in the subdivision shall be mandatory. 
(3)  The homeowners association shall not be dissolved before providing the appropriate documentation to transfer conservation easements and restrictive covenants. 
(c)  The owner shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance, and taxes on the open space. 
(d)  Any transfer of conservation easements or restrictive covenants is subject to the approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-138, § 9.4, 5-5-2015) 
Chapter 28 - TAXES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 28-19. - Annually set. 
Upon receipt of the property tax digest from the county, the council shall set the millage rate for ad valorem taxes for all real and personal property within the city for ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 1, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 1, § 1, 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-20. - Due date. 
The ad valorem taxes due the city shall become due and payable within 60 days of the date of billing, and any said taxes not paid in full by the last day specified shall, notwithstanding any existing law, be in default and shall bear interest and penalties, now or hereafter, as provided by law for taxes which are delinquent or in default and executions shall be issued therefore, at such time the city has met the legal requirements of all state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 1, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 1, § 2, 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-21. - Fines for delinquent payment. 
(a)  Any person failing to return his real property, for tax purposes, on or before the date due of each year shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of taxes due the city. Said penalty shall be in addition to the amount of ad valorem taxes due the city and also in addition any costs and interest and interest permitted by law. 
(b)  Partial payments shall be accepted. Interest and penalties will be computed on outstanding balances as of the delinquent date. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 1, § 3, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 1, § 3(a), 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-22. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The duty to collect by levy and sale, or otherwise, for delinquent taxes is hereby imposed upon the city manager or his designee as issuing officer and the sheriff of the county as execution officer. All levies of execution for delinquent taxes shall be in the name of the city. This duty may be contracted by the city council to a third party. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee, to comply with all provisions of state law applicable to the provision for issuing, sale and transfer of tax executions and laws governing judicial sales and to: 
(1)  Keep a file of all newspapers in which an official advertisement appears; 
(2)  Keep an execution docket in which shall be entered a full description of all executions; 
(3)  Maintain a book of all sales; 
(4)  Maintain an index to the sales and executions. 
(c)  The city manager shall sign all levies, notices, advertisements, and the like in his name for the city. 
(d)  Execution issued in the name of the city for delinquent ad valorem taxes shall be directed and delivered to the sheriff of the county, who shall enter the execution upon the docket to be kept in his office and he shall proceed to enforce the collection of the execution in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  The city will issue all fi. fas. for delinquent taxes and the sheriff of the county shall execute such fi. fas. under the same procedures provided by law governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal process and remedies. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 1, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-23. - Assessment of property for ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  The county board of tax assessors is hereby designated to have the responsibility for assessment and valuation of property within the city limits. The city council shall adopt the assessment and valuations made by the board of tax assesses of the county for all property located within the city limits, as may be established from year to year by the county board of tax assessors. 
(b)  The city council does authorize the tax commissioner of the county to make such adjustments in the collection of individual items of tax, and to make such refunds as may be proper and necessary, by adding to or deducting from the distribution due the city at the next period of accounting, along with stated explanation of the correction. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 1, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 28-24—28-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 28-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guest room means a room, lodging, or accommodation occupied or intended for occupancy by one or more occupants but does not mean a meeting room which is intended, designed, or used for meetings. 
Hotel means a structure or any portion of a structure, including, but not limited to, rooming or lodging houses, inns, motels, motor hotels and courts, hotels, cabins, public or private clubs, and tourist camps, which contain guest rooms which are regularly furnished for value to the public. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishing of services or accommodations which accompany the use or possession of a guest room in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who for a consideration uses or possesses or has the right to use or possess a guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, contract, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including the owner, proprietor, lessee, sub-lessee, licensee, or other entity operating the premises. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization, company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group, combination, or entity. 
Rent means the consideration received for the occupancy of a guest room in a hotel whether received in money, property, services, or credits. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-51. - Tax imposed; exceptions. 
(a)  There is imposed, assessed, and levied, and there shall be paid an excise tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city. The tax shall be paid on any occupancy after December 1, 2007, within the city limits. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are occupying such accommodations as a result of the destruction of their home by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  Any charges for continuous occupancy after the initial ten days of continuous occupancy; or 
(3)  Any rent for a guest room in a hotel which is occupied by a Georgia state or local government official or employee who is traveling on official business. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 2, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 08-01-20, 1-2-2008; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 2, § 2(a), 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-52. - Liability for payment. 
Every person occupying a guest room in a hotel in the city is liable for the tax imposed by this article. The liability for the tax is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city; however, the occupant is relieved from further liability upon the payment of the rent to the operator. Additionally, any operator who neglects, fails, or refuses to collect the tax from the occupant shall be liable for and shall pay the tax and any interest and penalties assessed. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-53. - Operator registration; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaged in or about to engage in the operating as an operator of a hotel in the city shall register at city hall on a form provided by the city. Persons engaged in the business must so register not later than December 31, 2007, but the failure to register shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax. 
(b)  The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. 
(c)  The city shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
(d)  The certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the city manager or his designee, upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-54. - Filing return; payment; collector reimbursement. 
(a)  The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city. All such taxes collected by the operator shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 15th day of every month next succeeding the month in which the occupancy occurs. 
(b)  On or before the 15th day of every month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city by every operator liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this article. The return shall be in such form as the city shall prescribe, and shall show the gross rent, the taxable rent, the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for such month, and such other information as the city may require. 
(c)  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return and the remittance of the net amount of the tax due to the city. 
(d)  If the amount of the tax due is not delinquent at the time of payment to the city, the operator may deduct three percent of the amount of the tax due as reimbursement for collecting the tax. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 5, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 2, § 5(a), (b), 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-55. - Disposition of revenue. 
All revenue collected by the city pursuant to this article shall be expended in a manner consistent with state law codified at O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 6, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-56. - Delinquent penalty. 
Any operator who fails to pay the tax to the city on or before the due date shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax not paid plus interest on the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-57. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws or ordinances for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the tax. 
(c)  Every operator renting guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or his designee, may require. 
(d)  The city manager or any person authorized in writing by the mayor may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, and facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or to ascertain and determine the amount of tax which should be paid. 
(e)  In administering this article, the city manager may require the filing by operators of reports relating to the rental of guest rooms. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-58. - Penalties. 
Any operator or person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 2, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Secs. 28-59—28-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 28-90. - Tax levied by city. 
The city council does exercise its authority as granted by state law (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq.) to levy an excise tax on rental motor vehicles to be used for the purposes provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease of 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and non-monetary consideration for the rental or lease, including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 1, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-92. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this Code. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on December 1, 2007 and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 11, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-93. - Authority and records. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager may require. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-94. - Excise tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 8 article 1, as amended on any motor vehicle rental charge made in the city after December 1, 2007. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the city and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges, actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever, is greater. 
(c)  The council declares that the proceeds received from the excise tax levied by this article are to be expedited for use in public safety facilities, including pedestrian sidewalks, installation of traffic lights, street lighting for public safety purposes, and for the maintenance of such systems of traffic lights and streets lights within the territorial city limits. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 3, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-95. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the state; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the state and returns it outside the state. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 4, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-96. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 5, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-97. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 15th day of each month following the month the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected through authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 6, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. 10-03-70, art. 3, § 6(a), 3-30-2010) 
Sec. 28-98. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by the city manager or his designee during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 7, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-99. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the city manager is not satisfied with the return of the excise provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental vehicle concern he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid (upon use of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession). Deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city manager shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found due by him. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and, if by mail, the service shall be addressed to the operator or the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city manager as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service shall be complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 8, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-100. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 9, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 28-101. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city manager or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-07, art. 3, § 10, 12-12-2007) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC ROADWAYS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of state and federal laws. 
(a)  For the purpose of regulating vehicles and traffic in the city, there is hereby adopted the following federal regulations: 
(1)  Parts 382, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, and 397 of Title 49 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, "The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986;" and 
(2)  The federal out of service criteria as amended from time to time. 
These provisions are adopted as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  Adoption of state law by reference. 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 40, chapter 6, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road" and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if recited herein. 
(2)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by law, every person convicted of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided by section 1-4. 
(c)  Any ordinance and/or part of this chapter which specifically designates the speed limits on the public streets of the city and/or which designates one-way streets are not affected by the adoption of the "Uniform Rules of the Road." 
(d)  City streets shall be divided into at least three categories. Speed limits for those designated categories shall be set forth in an appendix to this Code. 
(e)  The police department is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter upon all roads in the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 1, § 1, 5-6-2008) 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL 

Sec. 30-21. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters, and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable for that violation as for other violations of this code. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 1, § 2, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-22. - Funeral processions. 
(a)  The term "funeral procession" means a group of vehicles traveling from a funeral home or similar business to a cemetery or other proper burial site. Funeral processions shall be led by a funeral vehicle such as a hearse, and all cars in the procession shall burn regular headlights and stay in close formation. 
(b)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided such vehicles shall identify themselves by burning regular headlights and shall keep in close formation. When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 1, § 3, 5-6-2008) 
Secs. 30-23—30-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 30-48. - Enactment authority. 
The mayor and city council, under the authority of article 9, section 2, paragraph II (Home Rule for Municipalities) and article 9, section 2, paragraph III (Supplementary Powers) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, hereby ordain and enact into law this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 1, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-49. - Purpose. 
The governing authority of the city is authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of areas within the city limits for the purpose of protecting the public health safety and welfare. Specifically, the governing authority may provide for the regulation and control of motorized vehicles on the streets of the city; plan, designate, improve, manage, control and maintain an adequate city roadway system; and determine the maximum load, weight and vehicle dimensions which can be safely transported over each bridge on the city roadway system. Accordingly, the mayor and city council hereby enact the following provisions in an effort to regulate and control motorized vehicles within the city limits for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; to thereby curb the usage of certain residential streets in the city by trucks as cut through routes, and to discourage the parking of such vehicles on these streets and public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 2, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bimodal semitrailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck by which it is partially supported during movement over the highway and designed either with retractable flanged wheels or to attach to a detachable flanged wheel assembly for movement on the rails. 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city council and, where delegated by the mayor and council, the city police department and/or any other city personnel. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
Operator means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Owner means a person, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term "owner" includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in or lien by another person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security except as otherwise specifically provided in this title. 
Person means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association, or corporation. 
Pneumatic tire means every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load. A vehicle shall be considered equipped with pneumatic tires when pneumatic tires are used on all wheels. 
Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Police office means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, and residential or farm properties, timberland or forest. 
Roadway means that portion of a street, road, or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Semitrailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck by which it is partially supported. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop or stopping : 
(1)  When required, means complete cessation from movement; or 
(2)  When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Tractor means any self-propelled vehicle designed for use as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck means any motor vehicle having a gross weight of 18,000 pounds or over which is designed and used for the transportation of merchandise or freight. 
Truck camper means any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 3, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-51. - Restrictive vehicles required to use truck routes; exceptions. 
All trucks are prohibited from using roadways within the city limits, except those roadways authorized by this article as truck routes, including any amendments hereof, or as may be further designated by the governing authority as truck routes, except when: 
(1)  The terminal, parking lot, repair garage, or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; 
(2)  A delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route; ingress to and egress from that location shall be made by the most direct route available between that location and the nearest designated truck route. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 4, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-52. - Truck routes; posted regulatory signs. 
A list and map of approved truck routes shall be kept on file with the city police department and the city clerk. The list of truck routes may be revised as deemed necessary by the city police department with the approval of the governing authority, with the entire list requiring renewal by the governing authority biannually. All listed routes will be further identified by posted regulatory signs. 
(1)  Vehicles meeting the restriction shall be permitted to utilize Georgia Highway 154, as a means to travel through the city limits and shall be considered a truck route. 
(2)  In the case that a designated truck route does not provide sufficient access through the city, a written petition describing why the designated truck route is insufficient and suggesting proposed additional or alternative truck routes may be submitted along with a certified traffic study for both the existing truck route and the proposed alternative truck routes to the city manager requesting a designation of alternative truck routes. Upon receipt of such petition, the city council may consider such request and designate alternative truck routes if it is found necessary and proper. 
(3)  The city council may develop such alternative routes if the city council makes a finding on the city's own accord that such alternative routing is necessary and proper. 
(4)  This article shall not apply to any police, fire, ambulance or other public safety vehicle; vehicles owned or operated by the city; or vehicles owned or operated by designated representatives or contractors of the city actively engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of city streets, street improvements or utilities within the city's rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 5, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-53. - Use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles. 
If a designated truck route, or any portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles, as defined in this article, shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the governing authority and further identified by the posting of the regulatory traffic control sign. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 6, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-54. - Evidence required for restricted vehicle to be off truck route. 
When upon roadways other than those designated as truck routes, any person driving or in charge or control of any of the motor vehicles restricted by this article shall be prepared to present for inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a roadway other than a designated truck route. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 7, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-55. - Weight of vehicle and loads. 
No vehicle shall be operated on any roadway within the city limits designated as a truck route, with a total gross weight in excess of 56,000 pounds unless the vehicle is making a pickup or delivery on such road. The maximum gross weight of any vehicle operating on any roadway within the city limits shall not exceed 80,000 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 8, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-56. - Weight limitations on streets, bridges and culverts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street within the city limits where the weight of such motor vehicle, with or without load, is in excess of the weight as limited by this article and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle over a bridge or culvert within the city limits over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. 
(b)  The driver and/or owner shall be liable to the city for any and all damages caused by driving an overweight motor vehicle over any street, bridge and/or culvert with a posted sign. These damages are in addition to any fine or punishment that may be assessed for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 9, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-57. - Enforcement of weight and load limitations. 
(a)  Any person who violates the load limitations provisions of this article shall be conclusively presumed to have damaged the public roads, including bridges within the city limits by reason of such overloading and shall, in addition to any other penalty at law, recompense the city for such damages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27, as same may be amended. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a vehicle which is operated on the public roads within the city limits in violation of the weight limits provided in this article shall be required, in addition to paying the monies provided in subsection (a) of this section, to unload all gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds over the legal weight limit before being allowed to move the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person authorized by state law and this article to enforce this article may seize the offending vehicle of an owner who fails or whose operator has failed to pay the monies proscribed in subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27 and hold such vehicle until the proscribed monies are paid. Any authorized person seizing such vehicle under this subsection or subsection (b) of this section may, when necessary, store the vehicle, and the owner thereof shall be responsible for all reasonable storage charges thereon. When any vehicle is seized, held, unloaded or partially unloaded under this section, the load or any part thereof shall be removed or cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle without any liability on the part of the authorized person or the city because of damage to or loss of such load or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 10, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-58. - Parking of trucks and trailers. 
It shall be unlawful to park any truck or any trailer which is designated by the department of public safety for a license tag in a weight category heavier than 6,000 pounds on the right-of-way of any residential street or upon residential zoned property, unless said vehicle is making a delivery to said residential property. School buses shall not fall under this section. This section shall not apply to construction vehicles, trailers, or equipment temporarily located within a construction area, provided such vehicles, trailers or equipment are used in connection with dwelling units under construction within such construction area. This section shall not apply to trucks or trailers parked at the residence of the registered driver of said truck or trailer during such time as the driver is off duty and on the premises of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 11, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-59. - Parking or storage of unlicensed, inoperable vehicles, trailers or equipment. 
Vehicles and trailers of any kind without current license plates, or vehicles, trailers or equipment permitted to remain in an inoperable condition for more than 30 days shall not be parked or stored on or about any property within a residential zoned district; provided, however, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or equipment stored in an enclosed structure or appropriately covered and located in the rear yard area. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 12, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 30-60. - Penalties; enforcement generally. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not more than $1,000.00 or no more than 60 days in jail, or both, for each occurrence; and each occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the mayor and city council, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city's police department and any other city officer authorized by the state to make misdemeanor criminal arrests. Persons designated by the governing authority are hereby authorized to issue citations or summons or both, charging violations under this article, returnable to a court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances. 
(c)  For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article, any city court or courts having jurisdiction over state traffic offenses or other courts having jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances shall be entitled to take such action to ensure compliance, and the person convicted shall reimburse the city for any cost or expense associated with such compliance efforts, and the city shall be entitled to place a lien on the property or require a bond from the person to secure payment and reimbursement for these expenses. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-36, art. 2, § 13, 5-6-2008) 
Chapter 35 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Preamble. 
This chapter establishes comprehensive zoning regulations for the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article 9, section 2, paragraph 4 and article 9, section 2, paragraphs 1 and 3; pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 36, chapters 66 and 70; by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, as amended; by the city's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by charter, local laws and by the city's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state, and local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council hereby enacts into law the following zoning ordinance for the purposes of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; improving community appearance; lessening congestion in the thoroughfares; furthering traffic safety; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city; securing economy in government expenditures; maintaining rural character while encouraging sustainable development; and for other purposes, all in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan, as may be amended and, pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia, title 36, chapter 70, article I. 
(b)  In recognition of the changing needs and dynamic economy of a growing community, the city council finds that periodic updates of this chapter will be necessary to maintain a proper relationship between the provisions of the article and various community plans. In order to fulfill the above-stated purposes to the best of its abilities, the city council commits not only to the enforcement of this chapter, but to its maintenance and updating as the community's normal planning and review process may dictate. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-4. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-5. - Enactment and effect. 
(a)  This chapter and its provisions shall apply to all applications received on or after its effective date. Any application received prior to its effective date shall be processed under the provisions of the ordinances in effect on the date that the application was received and deemed complete. However, for any application pending at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the director shall change the zoning classification applied for to the most appropriate zoning classification under the new ordinance based on a comparison of the permitted uses associated with the two zoning classifications, provided said new ordinance zoning classification accommodates the uses requested in such pending application. 
(b)  Structure permit. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in plans, construction, alteration, or designated use of a structure for which a complete application for a building permit has been filed with the appropriate city authorities prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)  Prior changes to the official zoning map or variances, or conditional uses properly approved by the city under the former zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and enforceable under this chapter, including, as appropriate, article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-6. - Repealer. 
Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that certain ordinance known as "The City of Chattahoochee Hills Zoning Ordinance" adopted in 2009, as subsequently amended, shall be expressly repealed. There is expressly saved from repeal the following: 
(1)  Except for the zoning classifications provided for therein, all binding zoning master site plans, binding zoning master plan reports and binding conditions of zoning associated with all planned developments existing prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and indicated on the official zoning map; 
(2)  Except for the zoning classifications provided for therein, all binding site plans, binding written reports and binding conditions of zoning associated with conditional uses existing prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and indicated on the official zoning map; 
(3)  Except for the zoning classifications provided for therein, all binding conditions of zoning contained in ordinances to change the official zoning map for certain parcels of land existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and indicated on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.2.6, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-7—35-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 35-31. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Adoption. The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference and hereby made a part of this chapter. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the director and city clerk, shall bear the seal of the city under the following words: "Official Zoning Map of the City of Chattahoochee Hills," and shall include the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Amendments. 
(1)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered by the director or city clerk on the official zoning map within seven days after the amendment has been approved by the city council, with an entry as follows: "On ___________ (month) _____ (day), _____ (year) by official action of the City Council, the following change (changes) was (were) made to the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change or changes)," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the director and city clerk. 
(2)  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Regardless of the existence of copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the director. The director shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
(c)  Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by zoning ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the director and the city clerk and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted the date of ________, 20_____, as amended, as part of the City of Chattahoochee Hills Zoning Ordinance." Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(d)  Rules for interpretation. Where the director determines that uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district as set forth on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where possible, a file pertaining to a change to the official zoning map, which includes a correct legal description and minutes of the city council public hearing, shall be used for delineating zoning boundaries. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line of a thoroughfare, a city road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a thoroughfare, a city road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of a thoroughfare, state highway, interstate highway, or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(4)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 50 feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
(5)  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel thoroughfares that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the thoroughfares, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the multiple frontage lot lies shall apply to that portion of the multiple frontage lot. 
(6)  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the director shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-32. - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Relationship to comprehensive plan. The city comprehensive plan is hereby established as the official policy of the city concerning designated land uses, under which the incorporated areas of the city are divided into the following future development character areas as set forth in the future development map: preferred agricultural and rural residential area and preferred town and village area. 
(b)  Relationship between future development character area categories and zoning districts. The comprehensive plan does not change the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. Instead, the comprehensive plan establishes broad planning policy for current and future land uses and provides, among other things, designated areas within which only certain zoning districts may be authorized. The zoning districts that are permitted within each future development character area shall be restricted to those shown in the following table. 
Table 35-32. Future Development Map Compatibility Chart 

 
(c)  Conformity of the zoning maps with the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  Within the various future development categories described in this chapter and shown on the future development map, no amendment to the official zoning map shall permit a use except in accordance with the uses permitted in the comprehensive plan land use category applicable to the property to which the proposed zoning map amendment applies. 
(2)  Exception. Up to 40 percent of a given TN or VL district may extend outside of the preferred town and village area. The town center and most intensive portions of the development shall be within the preferred area. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-33. - Administration of zoning ordinance. 
It shall be the duty of the director to interpret and enforce this chapter and to carry out the duties required herein. The director may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-34. - Zoning verification. 
Upon request, the director shall have authority to issue written zoning verifications stating the existing zoning of a particular parcel of property including conditions and nonconforming situations applicable thereto. Requests to the director shall be in writing, accurately identify the property, and be accompanied by a fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-35. - Acceptance of alternative forms of documentation. 
The director shall have the authority and sole discretion to require and/or accept digital or other forms of electronic documents required by this chapter, upon a determination that doing so will assist the director and the public in the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-36. - Provisions of zoning ordinance to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or resolution require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of such standards shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-37. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use of any land in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-38. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  All uses of land, buildings or structures shall be completed in accordance with approved development plans and permits, including any conditions attached thereto. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. When a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall immediately advise the director of the violation, so that appropriate action may be taken to ensure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior primary facades are completed in accordance with the approved development plans and permits. 
(b)  The director shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this zoning ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. If it is found that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the director shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition prior to enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in recorder's court, shall be fined. Fines shall be assessed according to a schedule of fees adopted by the city council. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person, who commits, participates in, assists, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(e)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking any such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, or to abate any nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-39. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city council, the director, or the city attorney, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to stop, prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-40. - Severability clause. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. The city council hereby affirmatively declares that 
it would have adopted the remaining parts of this chapter if it had known that any such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.3.10, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-41—35-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS AND CRITERIA 

Sec. 35-69. - Terms not defined herein. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, tenth edition or later edition. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.4.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-70. - Use and interpretation. 
The following shall apply to the use of all words in this chapter: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The word "should" implies a preference supportive of the city's interest rather than a requirement. 
(5)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(6)  The terms "zoning," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established by this resolution. 
(7)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.4.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-71. - Definitions. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter within each zoning district are the minimum regulations that apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. The following regulations also shall apply to each type of use listed, whether such use is authorized as of right or by special permit. When applied to special permits these regulations shall be in addition to all additional criteria and procedures set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Appeal means a request for relief from a decision made by the director of the department of community development, other department directors, and/or the mayor and city council. 
ARC means the Atlanta Regional Commission. 
Baseline density means the number of density units per acre that may be developed on any parcel or assemblage, based on the zoning district, as regulated by Table 35-461, before the application of any transferable development rights (TDRs), density transfer charges (DTCs), or density bonuses. 
Basement means a level below a floor of a building with a minimum of one-half of the total wall area below grade. A basement is not a story. The term "basement" is synonymous with "cellar." 
Buffer means a natural undisturbed portion of a lot or district, except for approved disturbed areas, which is set aside to achieve a full visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation (or through interposed physical topography) and, to the extent that an all-season full visual barrier is not provided by existing vegetation, must be planted subject to the provisions of article VI, division 4 of this chapter. 
Buffer, state waters, means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Buffer, tributary, means a protection area adjoining the tributaries of the Chattahoochee River. 
Buildable area means the portion of a parcel of land where a building may be located and which shall contain enough square footage to meet the requirements of the respective zoning district. That portion which is not located in the setbacks, utility corridors, driveways, slopes to build thoroughfares, tree save areas, landscape strips, specimen tree areas, state water buffers, tributary buffers, buffer areas, wetlands, stormwater and sanitary sewer easements. 
Building means Any structure with a roof designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
Building facade line means A line on a lot running immediately adjacent to and co-planar with a building facade. 
Civic area means the portion of open space utilized to establish maintained public spaces within a district or on a lot. 
Comprehensive plan means the official adopted city comprehensive plan, including any plan adopted by the city council, or portion of such plan within the city comprehensive plan. This definition shall be construed liberally to include thoroughfare plans, parks and recreation plans, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects, as amended, within the subject matter of a comprehensive plan as provided by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, if formally adopted by the city. 
Density unit means the unit of measurement representing the total amount of residential or nonresidential development permitted for any property. 
Development of regional impact (DRI) study means a review by the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) and the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA) of large scale projects that are of sufficient size that they are likely to create impacts beyond the jurisdiction in which each project will be located. 
Director means the director of the department of community development, and his designee. 
Encroach means to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback or above a height limit. 
Facade means the building wall fronting a thoroughfare that constitutes any side of a structure or building. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship, or up to four unrelated persons, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a rooming, boarding or lodging house, or a hotel. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Floor area means the sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of connected or common walls, including common public areas, such as lobbies, rest rooms and hallways, spaces devoted exclusively to permanent mechanical systems, permanent storage areas, stairwells, elevator shafts, but excluding internal parking and loading areas, attics, porches, balconies and other areas outside of the exterior walls of the building. 
Footcandle means a unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Frontage means the area comprising both the private frontage and the public frontage of a lot. See Tables 35-213-1, 35-213-2, and 35-213-3. Private frontage and public frontage are divided by the property line. 

Frontage, private, means the area of a lot located within the first layer and in between the primary facade and the public frontage. See Table 35-213-3. 
Frontage, public, means the area in the right-of-way or access easement located adjacent to a lot and its primary facade including curbs, sidewalks and landscape strips. See Tables 35-213-1 and 35-213-2. 
Fueling positions means fuel pumps and related fuel dispensing machinery which facilitate the pumping of fuel into vehicles. 
Future development map means the map entitled future development map and contained within the city comprehensive plan. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Chattahoochee Hills. 
Grade means the existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to manmade alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating. 
Greenway means an open space corridor in largely natural conditions which may include paths for bicycles and pedestrians. 
Ground level means any building floor within five vertical feet of the adjacent required sidewalk or primary facade. 
GRTA means the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority. 
Hardship means the existence of extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the size, shape, or topography of a particular property, because of which the property cannot be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade along the primary facade of a structure to the highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. When referring to an accessory structure or a tower, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the accessory structure or a tower appurtenance. 
Impervious means the prohibition or limitation of the drainage of water. See article VIII, division 4 of this chapter for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Inoperative vehicle includes, but is not limited to, any automobile, boat, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: Wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, discarded; one which does not have a valid license plate attached thereto; or one which has not moved in a period of 90 days. 
Lawful use means any use of lots or structure which is not in violation of any existing federal, state or local law, statute, regulation or ordinance. 
Lot means the basic lawful unit of land, identifiable by a single deed. Lot, tract and parcel are synonymous. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public road rights-of-way or private road or access easements, where they exist. 
Lot, corner, means a multiple frontage lot adjoining two thoroughfares at their intersection. 
Lot frontage means the shortest property line oriented toward a thoroughfare. 
Lot line or property line means a line established through recordation of an approved plat, or a deed in the absence of a platting requirement, which separates a lot from other lots, or a lot from a right-of-way or thoroughfare. 
Lot line, rear, generally means the rear lot line is the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side, means a lot line which is not a rear or front lot line. 
Lot, multiple frontage, means lots adjoining more than one thoroughfare. 
Lot, nonconforming. See article V of this chapter. 
Lot-of-record means a lot, whether lawful or unlawful, which appears on a deed and/or plat recorded in the official records of the clerk of superior court. 
Lot, unlawful, means any lot-of-record which, at the time of recordation in the official records of the clerk of superior court, was not in compliance with zoning and subdivision laws in effect at that time. 
Lumen means a measure of brightness. 
Luminaire means a complete lighting system and includes a lamp and a fixture. 
Luminaire height. The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
Massing means the variation of a building achieved by varying the surface planes of the building with porches, balconies, bay windows, and/or overhangs, and/or stepping-back the buildings from the second floor and above, and/or breaking up the roofline with different elements to create smaller compositions. 
Net lot area means the total land area within the lot lines of a lot after the thoroughfare rights-of-way, open spaces, yards or easements that prohibit the use of the lot are deducted. 
Nonconforming means those situations defined and governed by article V of this chapter. 
Nonconforming characteristics means elements of buildings, structures or uses regulated by this chapter, including, but not limited to, lots, building frontages, outdoor dining, fences, walls, blocks, thoroughfares, thoroughfare connectivity, open space, buffers, parking, dumpsters, loading, curbs, sidewalks and landscape strips, as they apply to nonconforming situations defined and governed by article V of this chapter. 
Off-site or off-premises means the location of a structure or use outside the lot-of-record of the subject development including the adjoining thoroughfare or other right-of-way. 
Off-site residence means the location of a principal structure with a residential use located outside of the lot-of-record of the subject development. 
Official zoning map means the city's zoning map, as governed by article II of this chapter. 
On-site or on-premises means the location of a structure or use within the confines of a property delineated by property lines or, if referenced in a zoning or use permit case, within the confines of the boundaries of the legal description filed with the petition. The term "on-site" or "on-premises" is used for the purposes of interpreting minimum distance standards between noted uses throughout this chapter. 
Open space means a portion of a site which is permanently set aside for public or private use and which is developed in accordance with the open space provisions of this chapter. 
Parcel. See Lot. 
Park means a form of open space that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. 
Parking space means an area designated for the parking of one vehicle on an all-weather surface. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Plat, final, means the final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the clerk of the Fulton County superior court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter and the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to clearly indicate its feasibility, but is not in final form for recordation pursuant to the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Plaza means a form of open space designed for civic purposes and commercial activities in the more urban areas, generally paved and spatially defined by building frontages. 
Porch means a roofed open structure projecting from the exterior wall of a building and having at least 70 percent of the total area of the vertical planes forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner except by insect-screening between floor and ceiling. 
Preservation area means the portion of open space utilized to establish maintained rural conditions within a district or on a lot. 
Primary facade means the building facade representing the "front" of the building, complete with the primary pedestrian entrance. 
Property means, when used in conjunction with zoning proposal applications, an area of land composed of less than one lot, or of accumulations of one or more lots, or parts thereof 
Recycling bin means a container to temporarily hold recyclable materials until transferred to a recycling center by a recycling service, and with a holding a capacity of less than one-half yard. 
Relocated residential structure means the relocation of an existing residential structure to an off-site property or location. 
Retaining wall means a wall or similar structure used at a grade change to hold soil on the uphill side from slumping, sliding, or falling. 
Rural area means land with traditional agricultural, forestry, wilderness, and large-lot residential uses that directly express the city's stated desire to remain deliberately rural. Specifically, all land in the RL district, along with all open space designated as preservation area, and all land in HM, VL, and TN districts that lies outside the district buffers. 
Rural ornamentation means any automobile, truck, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, which is inoperable and without a valid license plate attached thereto, that is unmistakably identifiable as having been operated specifically for purposes of agriculture or agriculture related activities. 
Scale refers to the relationship of the size of a building to neighboring buildings and of a building to a site. In general, the scale of new construction should relate to the majority of surrounding buildings. 
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the city comprehensive plan. May also be referred to as scenic viewsheds. 
Screen means a fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, earthen berm, buffer area or any combination of these that is designed to provide a visual and/or physical barrier. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building or sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Setback means a space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Setback, minimum, means: 
(1)  The minimum yards as specified in the various zoning districts. 
(2)  A minimum required space between a property line and a structure. 
(3)  An area identified by a building line. 
Setback, primary facade, means the portion of lot located between the primary facade and its facing adjacent thoroughfare or open space. The primary facade setback area extends the entire length of an abutting thoroughfare or open space from intersecting lot line to intersecting lot line. The primary facade setback of corner lots shall be applied to the thoroughfare which abuts the lot for the shortest distance. See Table 35-359. 
Sewage means waste matter from residential or nonresidential establishments that is carried away in sewers, drains or septic tank pumping contractors for dumping or conversion into a form that is not toxic. 
Sewage, community, means a decentralized system for the treatment and disposal of sewage for multiple lots owned and operated by a public or private entity such as a general improvement district, sanitation district, homeowners association or municipal government. Sewage systems are governed by the county and higher authorities. 
Sewage, individual lot, means an on-site system for the treatment and disposal of sewage upon a single lot by means of septic tank and/or soil absorption system. Sewage systems are governed by the county and higher authorities. 
Sewer means an artificial and usually subterranean conduit designed to carry off sewage to a central treatment facility. The term "sewer" includes any pipe, manhole, connection, or other appurtenances thereto, located in a public right-of-way or easement that is designed to transport sewage and/or water. 
Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, supported by, or suspended by a stationary object, building or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to communicate information of any kind to the public. See chapter 22 for additional sign provisions. 
Site plan means a detailed plan, drawn to scale, based on a certified boundary survey, and reflecting conditions of zoning approval, various requirements of state law, and city ordinances and resolutions. 
Slope means degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two points on the ground separated by 500 feet or more. 
Special district means a form of a Hamlet District further delineated in article VII of this chapter. 
Special permit is the term used in reference to both special administrative permits and special use permits. 
Special permit, administrative, means the mechanism established in section 35-114 for uses that require additional review by the director to determine the appropriateness and compatibility of locating within the city. 
Special permit, use, means the mechanism established in section 35-115 for uses that require additional review by the city council to determine the appropriateness and compatibility of locating within the city. 
Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of these activities. 
Square means a form of open space designed for unstructured recreation and civic purposes, spatially defined by building frontages and consisting of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. 
Story means a portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the floor or space above it, excluding basements and attics. 
Structure means anything built or constructed which occupies a location on, or is attached to, the ground. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered structures. 
Structure, accessory, means a subordinate structure, customarily incidental to a principal structure or use and located on the same lot. Examples of structures in single-family dwelling districts include out-buildings, such as, tool sheds, woodsheds, workshops, outdoor kitchens, pool houses, gazebos, guest houses, storage sheds, detached garages and detached carports, etc. Fences and retaining walls are not considered structures. Driveways, surface parking lots, patios, and similar paved surfaces are not considered structures. 
Structure, principal, means a structure in which the principal use or purpose on a property occurs, and to which all other structures on the property are subordinate. Principal shall be synonymous with main and primary. 
Structure, support, means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice support structures, guy support structures, or monopole support structures. The term "support structure" includes radio and television transmission support structures, microwave support structures, common-carrier support structures, cellular telecommunication support structures, manmade trees and other similar structures. 
Subdivision means: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more lots further regulated in chapter 26. 
(2)  A development consisting of subdivided lots. 
Subdivision and land development ordinance means chapter 26. 
Supersedeas means an order by an appeals court commanding a lower court not to enforce or proceed with a judgment or sentence pending the decision on the appeal or until further order of the appeals court. 
Swale means a low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage. 
Thoroughfare means public or private vehicular and/or pedestrian ways as further designated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. The boundaries of the thoroughfare are defined by the property lines of the right-of-way or access easement, not by the thoroughfare improvements. See article VI, division 3 of this chapter for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Transferable development rights means the regulation of development rights within the city as regulated in chapter 14, article II. 
Turning radius means the curved edge of a thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. 
Use means the purpose or function arranged or intended for a structure or property. 
Variance means the mechanism established in section 35-116 for varying the terms of this chapter. 
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of support structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
Yard means a land area extending between a structure and a lot line. 
Yard, common, means a planted private frontage wherein the primary facade is setback from the thoroughfare or open space, and as regulated in Table 35-213-3. 
Yard, rear, means the minimum required distance between the rear lot line and a structure. True triangular lots do not have rear yards. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear yards. The director shall make the final determination of rear yards when in dispute or undefined by this definition. See Table 35-359. 
Yard, side, means a yard which is not the primary facade setback or rear yard. See Table 35-359. 
Yield means characterizing a thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a thoroughfare. 
Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance as it may be amended from time to time. 
Zoning proposal means an amendment, by the city council, to this zoning ordinance, including the official zoning map and the future development map. See section 35-103 for procedures pertaining to zoning proposals. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.4.3, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-72—35-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 35-101. - Procedures. 
The procedures and standards set forth in this article shall apply to all amendments, variances and special permits, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-102. - Pre-application meeting. 
(a)  Applications to amend the official zoning map or the future development map shall not be submitted or accepted by the city until a pre-application meeting is held with the director. 
(b)  The following applications for land disturbance or building permits shall not be submitted or accepted by the city until a pre-application meeting is held with the director: 
(1)  Single lots within the RL district when developing 35,000 square feet or more of new or additional floor area; 
(2)  Minor subdivisions, major subdivisions or farmette subdivisions within the RL district when developing 2,500 square feet or more of new or additional floor area; 
(3)  Applications within the HM, VL or TN districts when developing 2,500 square feet or more of new or additional floor area; 
(4)  Any application within any district developing uses having supplemental use provisions as provided in article VIII, division 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  At the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall present preliminary plans to the director that demonstrate how the pending application adheres to the requirements of this chapter. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is informational only and intended to assist in the applicant's understanding of this chapter and its requirements; to educate the applicant on community design policies and standards; to ensure the applicant is aware of the current comprehensive plan policies and vision; and to inform the applicant of all necessary application materials required by this chapter. 
(d)  No preliminary decision on the application or assurances that a particular proposal will be approved shall be made by any city personnel or official. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-103. - Amendments. 
(a)  Procedures for amendments. Whenever the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, this chapter, including the official zoning map, and the future development map may be amended by the city council. The procedures for such amendments shall be as provided in this article. Such amendments may be referred to herein as "zoning proposals." 
(b)  Initiation of amendments. 
(1)  Amendments to this chapter. Amendments to the text of this chapter may be initiated only by members of the city council. 
(2)  Amendments to the official zoning map or the future development map. Such map amendments may be initiated by application of the owners of the subject property or the owners' authorized agents, or by members of the city council. 
(3)  When future development map amendments are proposed or required, all other zoning proposal applications for property included in such proposals shall not be accepted or received by the city until such time as a final decision, as provided in section 35-108, on the future development map proposal is made. 
(c)  Application schedule. 
(1)  Applications to amend the official zoning map, or the future development map must be filed in accordance with a submission schedule established by the director. No application shall be deemed filed until all required forms have been completed and all required materials have been submitted, including all fees. The date the application is complete and hence filed shall be noted on the application form by the director and all subsequent deadlines tied to the date of application shall begin to run as of said date of filing. 
(2)  If the final decision of the city council is the denial of an amendment to this chapter that was for the purpose of a change to the official zoning map, then the same property may not again be considered for a change to the official zoning map until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the action taken by the city council in denying such changes to the respective map. 
(3)  No amendment to the future development map that is denied by the city council may be resubmitted for six months immediately following the action of denial by the city council. 
(4)  An application to amend to the official zoning map or the future development map may not be withdrawn or amended, unless authorized by a majority vote of the city council, after the legal advertising required by this article has been submitted for publication. The city council by majority vote may allow an application to be so withdrawn with or without prejudice. Applications authorized to be withdrawn without prejudice shall not be considered a denial for the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Content of applications. Applications to amend the official zoning map or the future development map shall be filed with the director on a form available from the director and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  An application fee established by the city council. 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address of the owner, and the same information from the applicant, if different. Whenever the applicant is not the property owner, the owner shall certify by notarized signature that the applicant has authority to file the application. When properties have more than one owner, the notarized signature of all property owners shall be required. 
(3)  The thoroughfare address and a legal description of the property. 
(4)  Two copies of a property survey, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, location of the tract, dimensions along all property lines, acreage of the tract and the thoroughfare names and right-of-way dimensions of abutting thoroughfares. The plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's signature and seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(5)  A narrative description of the intent of the proposed amendment and the intended timing and phasing of development. 
(6)  The current and proposed zoning, future development map classifications, existing and proposed uses of the property proposed to be reclassified and all zoning and land uses of properties abutting the subject property. 
(7)  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall provide a written analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to each of the standards governing the exercise of zoning set forth in section 35-109. If the application requests a change in the future development map, the applicant shall provide a written analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to each of the standards for review of changes to the future development map set forth in section 35-110. 
(8)  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall submit all development plans required by section 35-104. 
(9)  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall submit all disclosures of campaign contributions required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3, as amended. 
(10)  If the application requests one or more variances, the applicant shall provide written analysis of the standards for application and approval of variances in section 35-116 for each variance request. 
(11)  Any other information or documentation the department may reasonably deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application consistent with required review standards. 
(e)  Expansion of existing districts. The following additional provisions shall apply to zoning districts that expand to incorporate neighboring properties that, alone, do not meet the minimum requirements of the expanding district: 
(1)  The proposed area of incorporation shall be required to meet the application requirements of section 35-104. 
(2)  The planning commission and city council shall solicit a recommendation from any home owner association or official neighborhood organization within the expanding zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-104. - Additional application requirements. 
(a)  Applications to amend the official zoning map submitted by property owners or the owners' authorized agents shall include development plans that meet the following criteria. These development plans shall be prepared upon a base drawing stamped and sealed by a state-registered professional architect, surveyor, civil engineer, landscape architect or land planner. 
(b)  Applications shall contain five sets of copies of each of the following elements, unless determined inapplicable to a specific development by the director: 
(1)  Site analysis. A site analysis including information on all existing manmade and natural features, utilities, all streams and easements, and features to be retained, moved, or altered, habitats for endangered or threatened species, wetlands, flood plains, state waters, shorelines, and associated buffers, historic, cultural, and archaeological sites, and steep slopes (land with a slope angle of 20 percent or greater for a minimum of 30 feet horizontally). 
(2)  The existing shape and dimensions of the existing lot to be built upon including the size, measurement and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot shall be included. 
(3)  Site plan. A site plan showing compliance with regulations and calculations required by this chapter related to densities, designated uses, internal circulation and parking areas, parking calculations, open space, buffer areas, height, sidewalks, blocks, existing and proposed pedestrian connectivity and thoroughfares, including their respective measurements. 
(4)  The concept plan requirements as set forth in chapter 26, subdivision and land development. 
(5)  In addition to the submittal requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the following additional information shall be provided for portions of developments proposed to be included in the initial phase of development: 
a.  Site plan. A site plan at a minimum one inch equals 20 feet scale showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by this chapter which shall include, but not be limited to, information on all proposed improvements including proposed building footprints, doors, sidewalks, yards, open space, under- and over-head utilities, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, amenities, proposed pedestrian connectivity and thoroughfares, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
b.  Multiple buildings. Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. Grouping of similar buildings is encouraged to minimize the number of reviews required and to allow for originality and design flexibility. 
(c)  All rezonings resulting in the potential for density greater than baseline density shall require a development agreement between the city and the applicant setting forth the planned application of the TDR ordinance in the proposed district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-105. - Staff review. 
(a)  All completed applications for zoning proposals, special use permits and variances shall be distributed by the director to appropriate city officials and departments for review and comment. The director, in association with the city clerk, shall create an ordinance reflecting each requested zoning proposal, special use permit and variance and place said ordinance for first read on the agenda of the next available regular or specially called meeting of the city council. All zoning proposals, special use permits and variances shall be reviewed by the director as set forth in this article and scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission, in accordance with this chapter's procedures. 
(b)  The director shall submit a report on each zoning proposal, special use permit and variance. The director shall investigate and include in the report a recommendation applying the standards enumerated in this chapter applicable to the type of zoning proposal, special use permit and variance under review. The director's report shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-106. - Public hearing; notice; rehabilitation centers. 
(a)  Public hearing. 
(1)  The city council shall make all final decisions on zoning proposals, special use permits and variances authorized by this article. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to said action following the public notice requirements herein, according to the following types of proposals under consideration. 
(2)  Zoning proposals, special use permits and variances shall not be adopted until the title of the implementing ordinance for such action shall have been read at two meetings of the city council. The beginnings of said meetings shall not be less than five business days apart. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing required in subsection (a) of this section, the director or city clerk shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city a notice of the public hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing and, when applicable, the information required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail by the director to owners of property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property who appear on the tax records of the city as retrieved by the county's geographic information system, at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The written notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the mail is not delivered provided that the city uses the address information provided in the tax records and affixes adequate postage thereto. 
(3)  If a zoning proposal is for a change to the official zoning map and the request for change is initiated by a party other than the city, then: 
a.  The notice, in addition to the requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
b.  The applicant shall post one or more signs in a conspicuous location on the property, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. At least one sign of no less than three feet in length and two feet in height and no larger than allowed in the city's sign ordinance, shall be posted along each thoroughfare on which the subject property has frontage. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional 300 feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of 300 feet of frontage on each thoroughfare on which the subject property has frontage. The director shall provide the signs to the applicant for timely posting by the applicant. Each sign shall contain the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
(c)  Rehabilitation centers. 
(1)  When a zoning proposal relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a rehabilitation center, a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months but not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on such zoning decision by the city council. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearing required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Notice of this hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and signs shall be posted on the property in the manner required under subsection (b) of this section. 
(3)  Notice as required under this subsection (c), both posted and published, shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a rehabilitation center. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-107. - Policies and procedures. 
(a)  The following policies and procedures shall govern the calling and conduct of the public hearing held by the planning commission pursuant to this article. Printed copies of these policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(b)  The chair of the planning commission shall preside over the hearing. After calling the hearing to order, the planning commission chair shall request that the parcels of property and/or references to the code sections which are the subject of the zoning action be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the recommendation of the director shall be presented. The written recommendation of the director shall be made a part of the record. 
(c)  Proponents of each zoning action shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the action. If all ten minutes are not used, the proponent's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each action shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each action. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote of the planning commission, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
(d)  All speakers shall identify themselves and state their current address. Remarks should be limited to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the proposal under consideration. Speakers shall address all remarks to the planning commission. 
(e)  Following public comment, the planning commission chair shall close the public comment portion of the hearing with respect to the proposal under consideration and seek discussion and/or a motion to act upon the proposal as provided in section 35-108. 
(f)  All items on an advertised agenda for a public hearing shall be heard on the scheduled date unless a majority of the members of the planning commission present at the public hearing determine that specific circumstances surrounding the matter warrant an additional hearing on the matter to a future date and time. In such instances, the city shall provide public notice of the new time, date, and location of the additional hearing consistent with the notice requirements of section 35-106. 
(g)  If a scheduled public hearing must be canceled due to lack of a quorum, inclement weather or other extraordinary event, the public hearing shall be rescheduled and the city shall provide public notice of the new time, date, and location of the additional hearing consistent with the notice requirements of section 35-106. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-108. - Zoning decisions. 
(a)  Action by the planning commission. 
(1)  In making a recommendation on zoning proposals, special use permits and variances under this article, the planning commission shall review and consider the application or amendment and materials of record, the data, evidence, and opinions submitted during public comment, the recommendation of the director, and the standards applicable to the type of proposal under review. 
(2)  Upon the conclusion of deliberations, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the city council: 
a.  Approval; 
b.  Approval as recommended by staff with recommended conditions; 
c.  Approval as recommended by staff with revised conditions; 
d.  Denial; or 
e.  Recommend deferral of the proposal for additional information at a future public hearing, as regulated in section 35-107. Deferrals shall be limited to a maximum period of time of 90 days. The 90-day period shall begin on the same day the recommendation was made by the planning commission. If the deferred item is not returned or concluded within the prescribed period, the item shall then automatically be deemed withdrawn and shall be required to follow the prescribed and established procedure to re-file applications before the planning commission. 
(b)  Action by the city council. 
(1)  A meeting of the city council for the purposes of reviewing and making final decisions on zoning proposals, special use permits and variances under this article shall be held at the next regular or specially called meeting of the city council following the public hearing of the planning commission. At said meeting, the city council shall provide the second read for the zoning action ordinance, and shall review any analysis or materials submitted by the initiating party and opposing parties, the recommendations of the director, the minutes of the planning commission public hearing, all other matters of record, materials, data, evidence and opinion submitted during public comments, and the review standards and criteria set forth herein that are applicable to the type of proposal under review in making a final decision on each zoning action. Final decisions by the city council shall be adopted by an ordinance implementing such action in accordance with the charter of the city. 
(2)  Upon the conclusion of deliberations, the city council may approve, deny, or defer the proposal, add or delete conditions to the proposal, or allow the proposal to be withdrawn with or without prejudice in compliance with section 35-103. 
(3)  An action by the city council to defer a final decision on the zoning action shall include a statement of the date and time of the next regular or special meeting at which the proposal will be considered by the city council. 
(4)  If deemed necessary the city council may defer a decision for the purpose of holding another public hearing at the planning commission. The notice requirements for public hearings contained in section 35-106 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-109. - Zoning action review standards. 
(a)  The director, the planning commission and the city council shall consider the following standards governing the exercise of the zoning power whenever deliberating over any changes to the official zoning map pursuant to this chapter. 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of utilities, public facilities or schools; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause city thoroughfares or transportation facilities to be unable to meet the transportation policies of the comprehensive plan due to excess traffic congestion; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; 
(4)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and Development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(5)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(6)  The extent to which property values are diminished by their particular zoning restrictions; 
(7)  The extent to which the possible reduction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(8)  The relative harm to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(9)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning proposed; 
(10)  Consistency with any adopted county and city wastewater treatment plans, including the feasibility and impacts of serving the property with public wastewater treatment service and, if an alternative wastewater treatment method is proposed, whether such wastewater treatment method will have a detrimental impact on the environment or will negatively affect other public concerns; 
(11)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the vicinity of the property; 
(12)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(13)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(14)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(15)  In instances involving district expansion, whether the proposed change is supported by the homeowner associations or official neighborhood associations within the expanding district; and 
(16)  In instances involving developments of regional impact, whether the proposed change is supported by ARC and/or GRTA. 
(b)  The review standards for special permits are set forth in section 35-113. The review standards for the future development map amendments are set forth in section 35-110. The review standards for variances are set forth in section 35-116. All applicable review standards shall be considered by the director, the planning commission and the city council. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-110. - Future development map amendments. 
(a)  The director, the planning commission and the city council shall consider the following standards governing future development map amendments when deliberating over such proposals. 
(1)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal meets the policies and intent established in the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal is compatible with the surrounding character areas as identified in the future development map; 
(3)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal can be adequately served by existing transportation facilities and other infrastructure, such as schools, water, sewer and/or septic tank systems; 
(4)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal negatively impacts natural and historic resources identified by the city; 
(5)  Whether the future development map amendment proposal is in the best interest of the city and the public good and whether the proposal protects the health and welfare of its citizens; and 
(6)  Whether the property to be affected by the future development map amendment proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently designated on the future development map. 
(b)  Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.10, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-111. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  Each zoning classification may have a subheading thereunder to be known as "conditional." 
(b)  Whenever an application amending the official zoning map, amending the future development map, or for a special permit is accompanied or supported by specific plans and designs or other written requirements for a particular use and its development, the city council may approve such action as "conditional". In addition, the director may recommend, and the city council may adopt, conditions to any such actions when appropriate to mitigate impacts of the proposal upon surrounding properties consistent with the purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Upon approval by the city council, such conditional plans and written conditions shall bear a certificate by the city clerk indicating said approval and shall become a part of the ordinance adopting the zoning action. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the director to ensure that the development and use of the property is in strict compliance with the plans, designs and other written requirements adopted and approved as conditions by the city council. 
(e)  Conditions adopted and approved by the city council shall not be altered, changed or varied unless such changes are approved by the city council in accordance with the procedures for amendments set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.11, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-112. - Procedures for annexation. 
If a zoning proposal is for property to be annexed into the city, then: 
(1)  The city council shall complete the procedures required by this chapter for changes to the official zoning map, except for the final vote of the city council, prior to the adoption of the annexation, ordinance or resolution or the effective date of any local act but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under the O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6. 
(2)  The public hearings required by section 35-106 shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city. 
(3)  In addition to any other notice requirements, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation a notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of section 35-106, as applicable, and shall place a sign on the property when required by section 35-106; and 
(4)  The zoning classification approved by the city council following the hearing required by section 35-106 shall become effective on the later of: 
a.  The date the zoning proposal is approved by the city council; 
b.  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2; or 
c.  Where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11 or 36-36-113, the dates provided for in said code sections. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.12, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-113. - Special permits: general. 
(a)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Special permit applications may be initiated upon application by the owner of the subject property or the owner's authorized agent. 
(2)  Applications for special permits shall be filed with the director on a form available from the director and shall, at a minimum, include the application requirements of sections 35-103 and 35-104 as applicable to the special permit request. 
(3)  Applications for special permits shall be for one of the following special permit types: special administrative permit or special use permit. 
(4)  Additional regulations regarding the administration of special permits are provided for in section 35-114 for special administrative permits and section 35-115 for special use permits. 
(b)  Application fees. Application fees shall be established by the city council and shall not be refunded once submitted. 
(c)  Criteria. No application for a special administrative permit shall be granted by the director and no application for a special use permit shall be granted by the city council unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following criteria, all of which are applicable to each application: 
(1)  Whether or not the proposed plan is consistent with all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located, including required parking, loading, setbacks and transitional buffers; 
(2)  Compatibility of the proposed use with land uses on surrounding properties and other properties within the same zoning district, including the compatibility of the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings; 
(3)  Adequacy of the ingress and egress to the subject property, and to all proposed buildings, structures, and uses thereon, including the traffic impact of the proposed use on the capacity and safety of public thoroughfares, including pedestrian flow and access, providing access to the subject site; 
(4)  Consistency with any adopted county and city wastewater treatment plans, including the feasibility and impacts of serving the property with public wastewater treatment service and, if an alternative wastewater treatment method is proposed, whether such wastewater treatment method will have a detrimental impact on the environment or will negatively affect other public concerns; 
(5)  Adequacy of other public facilities and services, including stormwater management, schools, parks, sidewalks, and utilities, to serve the proposed use; 
(6)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any surrounding properties by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration, or by the character or volume of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
(7)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any surrounding use by reason of the manner of operation or the hours of operation of the proposed use; and 
(8)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any environmentally sensitive areas or natural or historic resources. 
(d)  Development of an approved special use. The issuance of a special permit shall only constitute approval of the proposed use. Development of the use shall not be initiated until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required. 
(e)  Expiration of a special permit. Unless a building permit or other required permits are secured within 36 months of issuance of the special permits, and construction subsequently undertaken and actively continued pursuant to such building permit, the special permit shall expire automatically unless the permit is extended upon resolution of the city council. 
(f)  Modifications to a special permit. Changes to an approved special permit, other than time extensions provided under subsection (e) of this section, shall be subject to the same application, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.13, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-114. - Special permits: special administrative permits. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Special administrative permits are a type of special permit provided for uses that are potentially compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district but that require from the director individual review of their location, design, intensity, configuration and/or public facility impact to determine the appropriateness of the use in any particular site in the district and compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(2)  A special administrative permit shall not be approved for a use in any zoning district unless it is listed as a special administrative permit eligible use for the subject district in Table 35-595. 
(b)  Time limits. The director may specify limits on the duration of each special administrative permit which is approved. Subject to any limit in duration, the special administrative permit shall become an integral part of the zoning applied to the subject property and shall be extended to all subsequent owners and interpreted and enforced by the director in the same manner as any other provision of this chapter, subject to the limitations provided in this section and section 35-113. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  The provisions related to special permits in section 35-113 shall also apply to special administrative permits. 
(2)  The director shall prepare a written analysis of each application for special administrative permit including findings of fact based on the criteria contained in section 35-113(c) and in addition, as applicable to the use proposed, to the applicable regulations contained in article VIII of this chapter. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(3)  The director shall make a written decision approving or denying each special administrative permit application and shall transmit said decision to the applicant. Said decision shall be based on a determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in section 35-113(c), the use standards contained in article VIII of this chapter where applicable to the use proposed, the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, and the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
(4)  The director shall make a final decision on each special administrative permit application within 45 days of its receipt. One 45-day extension of this review period may be exercised by the director if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the director fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 90 days, the application shall be deemed to be denied. 
(5)  Appeals from a final decision on a special administrative permit by an aggrieved party shall follow the appeals procedure of section 35-117(a). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.14, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-115. - Special permits: special use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Special use permits are a type of special permit provided for uses that are potentially compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district but that require from the city council individual review of their location, design, intensity, configuration and public facility impact to determine the appropriateness of the use in any particular site in the district and compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(2)  A special use permit shall not be approved for a use in any zoning district unless it is listed as a special use permit eligible use of the type indicated for the subject district in Table 35-595. 
(b)  Time limits. The city council may specify limits on the duration of each special use permit which is approved. Subject to any limit in duration, the special use permit shall become an integral part of the zoning applied to the subject property and shall be extended to all subsequent owners and interpreted and enforced by the director in the same manner as any other provision of this chapter, subject to the limitations provided in this section and section 35-113. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  The provisions related to special permits in section 35-113 shall also apply to special use permits. 
(2)  Director analysis and recommendations. 
a.  The director shall prepare an analysis of each application for special use permit and shall present the findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission and the city council. 
b.  The director's recommendations on each application for special use permit shall be based on the criteria contained in section 35-113(c) and, in addition, as applicable to the use proposed, to the applicable regulations contained in article VIII of this chapter. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
(3)  The director shall prepare a proposed ordinance to effect the proposed special use permit. Before deciding on any special use permit pursuant to the requirements set forth in this section, public notice and a public hearing before the planning commission shall be provided thereon pursuant to the requirements of this section and section 35-106. 
(4)  The director shall provide the city council complete information on each proposed application for special use permit, including a copy of the application and all supporting materials, all communications and other writings either in support of or in opposition to the application, the written report, minutes and recommendation of the director and the minutes and recommendation of the planning commission. 
(5)  The decision of the city council on each application for special use permit shall be based on a discretionary determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in section 35-113(c), the use standards contained in article VIII of this chapter, where applicable to the use proposed, the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, and the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.15, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-116. - Variances. 
(a)  Requests for variances. The city council may authorize, upon proper application in specific cases, variance from the terms of this chapter. Request for variance applications shall be filed with the director. All filed applications shall be reviewed by the director who shall provide a written recommendation based upon the factors below to the city council prior to a final decision. 
(b)  General standards for application and approval. 
(1)  Prohibited variances. No variance shall be granted to allow a building, structure or use not authorized in the applicable zoning district, a density of development not authorized within such district, reinstatement of any nonconforming situation, a special administrative permit or a special use permit. 
(2)  Application methods. Applications for variances shall include the materials set forth in section 35-103(d)(1) through (4), and a narrative statement explaining the reasons for the variance requested. In addition, a statement showing compliance with each of the standards set forth in subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be provided. Variances that accompany an application for a separate zoning proposal or special permit shall meet the necessary requirements regarding zoning proposal or special permit submittals and processes set forth in this article, including the requirement for two reads in section 35-106(a)(2) in addition to these variance requirements. 
(3)  Criteria. The city council may authorize variances from the terms of this chapter only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular Property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this chapter to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
e.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this chapter. 
(c)  Variance decisions. 
(1)  Before deciding a variance application in accordance with this chapter, the planning commission shall provide for a public hearing on the proposed action in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 35-107. 
(2)  The provisions for public notice set forth in section 35-106(b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3)b regarding publication, written notice, and sign postings shall apply to variance applications. 
(3)  The city council shall make a variance decision for each application based upon a determination of the facts and application of the criteria in subsection (b)(3) of this section. For purposes of this chapter the term variance decision means final action by the city council which results in a variance approval or a variance denial. 
(4)  Variance decisions shall be made no later than 120 days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant and director. 
(5)  The city council may impose conditions as it deems necessary in a particular case to protect the public interest and mitigate impacts of the variance upon surrounding properties as part of a variance decision, thereby approving the variance as conditional. Such conditions shall become an integral part of the variance decision. 
(6)  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the variance decision. Fees shall not be refunded. 
(7)  Appeals of a variance decision by the city council by an aggrieved party to the superior court shall be authorized and shall follow the appeal provisions in section 35-117(b). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.17, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-117. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Appeal to the city council. 
(1)  Where it is alleged by any aggrieved person, firm or corporation that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director, or other authorized city official in the performance of duties under this chapter, such person, firm or corporation may seek a review of such order, requirement, decision or determination by the city council. Said appeals shall be filed with the director in writing on forms provided by the director within 15 days following the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. 
(2)  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the city council, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city council or the superior court of Fulton County, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(3)  The city council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and provide 15 days' notice thereof as well as written notice to the parties in interest. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent or by an attorney. The mayor shall request that the appeal be identified and read. The aggrieved party shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the appeal. If all ten minutes are not used, the aggrieved party's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. The acting party and those in opposition to the appeal shall then be allowed a total of ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the order, requirement, decision or determination. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote of the city council, provided they are expanded equally for the aggrieved party and the acting party. 
(4)  Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the city council shall make a determination on each appeal. The city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than 45 days from the date of the filing of the appeal unless an extension of time is agreed to by the appealing party. The city council may reverse, defer, sustain, or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director or other authorized city official and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken. An appeal shall be sustained or the decision below modified only upon an expressed finding by the city council that the authorized city official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that said official's action was arbitrary. The action of the city council on an administrative appeal shall be final. 
(b)  Appeals from final decisions of the city council. 
(1)  Required appeal procedure. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the city council regarding special use permits (section 35-114(c)(5)), appeals (section 35-117(a)) or variances (section 35-116(c)(7)), or any city officer or department head affected by such decision, is authorized to appeal from such decision to the superior court of Fulton County by filing with the clerk of said court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the city council is rendered. 
(2)  Notice to city council. Upon such filing, the clerk of the superior court shall give immediate notice thereof to the city clerk. Within 30 days, the city clerk shall cause to be filed with said superior court clerk a duly certified copy of the proceedings had before the city council, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the decision of the city council. 
(3)  Judicial procedure, superior court. Thereafter at the next term of the superior court, or in vacation upon ten days' notice to the parties, the judge of such court shall proceed to hear and pass upon the appeal. In determining the questions presented by the appeal, the court shall determine whether the decision of the city council is correct as a matter of law. 
(4)  Supersedeas may be granted. The filing of an appeal in the superior court from such final decisions of the city council shall not ipso facto act as a supersedeas, but a supersedeas may be granted by the court upon such terms and conditions as may seem reasonable and proper. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.18, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-118. - Developments of regional impact (DRI). 
(a)  Application. When a zoning proposal includes any proposed development of a use and intensity that meets the definition of a DRI in the most recently published standards of GRTA and/or the ARC, it shall be deemed to be a DRI. The application for such zoning proposal shall include the information required for review of a DRI in accordance with the most recently published procedures of GRTA and ARC. 
(b)  Procedures. The applicant shall provide all documentation and attend all meetings necessary to meet the most recently published standards and procedures for review of DRI applications required by GRTA and the ARC. 
(c)  Recommendation from the GRTA and ARC. No required public hearings or final action shall occur on such zoning proposal application by the city council until a recommendation is received from the GRTA and ARC regarding the DRI. 
(d)  Certified copy of ordinance. After the city council takes final action on the application, the director shall transmit to ARC and the state department of community affairs (DCA) a certified copy of the ordinance recording the action, including a record of the total number of members of the city council that voted for and against approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.19, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-119. - Zoning reversion. 
If a zoning action has not vested after 36 months from the adoption of the zoning action ordinance, the city may initiate a process to revert the zoning to its previous state. A zoning action or concept plan shall be considered vested upon any of the following events: 
(1)  Issuance of a building permit; 
(2)  Approval of a preliminary plat; 
(3)  Conservation easements in place on ten percent of the land. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.5.20, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-120—35-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Sec. 35-150. - General provisions. 
(a)  Within the zoning districts established by this chapter, or in other provisions or amendments, there exist lots, uses of land, uses of land and buildings, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of buildings and structures that were lawful before this chapter and the subsequent official zoning map was adopted, but that would be prohibited under the terms of the adopted zoning ordinance or future amendment. 
(b)  Such nonconforming situations are hereby declared to be incompatible with authorized and permitted uses and regulations within the districts involved. It is the intent of the city to require the cessation of certain of these nonconforming situations, and to allow others to continue, on a limited basis, until they are otherwise removed or cease. It is further the city's intent that nonconforming situations not be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures, or uses of land prohibited by this chapter, and that no such nonconforming building, structure, or use of land be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of non-conformity. 
(c)  For lots made nonconforming due to changes to the zoning ordinance or the official zoning map, see section 35-357(g). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-151. - Nonconforming open uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this chapter in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this chapter: 
(1)  When any portion of a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, said portion shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
(2)  No nonconforming open use of land shall be enlarged to cover more land than was previously occupied by such nonconforming use. 
(3)  When any portion of a nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a continuous period in excess of one year, any future use of such land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this chapter. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision, unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to such land. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-152. - Reversions and changes. 
(a)  Any nonconforming use, use of land or building in combination, open use of land, use of land and structure in combination, nonconforming lot of record, or nonconforming characteristic ("nonconforming situations") that is changed to a conforming state shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming situation. 
(b)  No nonconforming situation shall be changed to another nonconforming situation. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-153. - Nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination and nonconforming use of land and structures in combination. 
The following regulations apply to the nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination and the nonconforming use of land and structures in combination: 
(1)  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures may be continued, but no such use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of one year shall be reestablished unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
(2)  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures, or any such building or structure, shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(3)  A nonconforming use of a building may be extended into those interior parts of a building which were constructed and manifestly designed for such use prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-154. - Nonconforming characteristics of buildings, structures and uses. 
No building, structure or use with nonconforming characteristics shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-155. - Area extensions prohibited. 
A nonconforming use, or building or structure in combination with a use, or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics, shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or beyond the conforming size, height, or other dimensions or characteristics of the building or structure as it existed on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments applicable thereto rendering such situations nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-156. - Nonconforming uses requiring special use permit. 
(a)  No nonconforming use, building or structure requiring a special use permit, including any use, building or structure that was authorized as of right prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but would require a special use permit upon the adoption of said ordinance, shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner except after application for and approval of the now-required special use permit. Normal repair and maintenance of such buildings and structures is authorized without the need for a special use permit. 
(b)  No such use, building, or structure that has been discontinued for a continuous period of one year shall be reestablished unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-157. - Reconstruction. 
Any building or structure constituting a nonconforming use of land and building, nonconforming use of land and structures, or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics that has been unintentionally damaged by fire or natural causes such as flood or storms, may be reconstructed to its previous nonconforming characteristics and used as it was prior to damage if said reconstruction is completed within one year of the date of the damage. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-158. - Buildings and structures. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the director. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.9, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-159. - Buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or structure for which a development or building permit was lawfully applied for or issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto, provided: 
(1)  Such permit or approval has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date; 
(2)  Actual building construction is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit or approval; 
(3)  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit or approval and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit or approval; and 
(4)  No renewals or extensions of said permit or approval shall be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 1.6.10, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-160—35-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC REALM AND OPEN SPACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 35-187—35-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BLOCKS AND CONNECTIVITY 

Sec. 35-211. - Block defined. 
An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by thoroughfares, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. (See figure.) 

(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-212. - General. 
(a)  All developments shall comply with the city subdivision regulation thoroughfare standards. 
(b)  All thoroughfares shall follow existing land contours with a minimum of cut and fill and shall be designed to accommodate interparcel pedestrian and vehicular access. Preferential treatment of pedestrian access is acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-213. - Public frontages. 
(a)  Public frontages shall be designed as shown in Tables 35-213-1 and 35-213-2. 
(b)  Public frontages shall include trees of various species as approved by the director, and may include low maintenance understory landscape. The introduced landscape shall consist primarily of native species requiring minimal irrigation, fertilization and maintenance. 
(c)  Public frontage shall include regularly spaced trees with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, clears the first story. 
(d)  Trees required on public frontages may be permitted to relocate to open spaces when such areas are located within 100 feet from where the trees would otherwise be required. 
Table 35-213-1 Public Frontages, General 

Table 35-213-2 Public Frontages, Specific 

Table 35-213-3 Private Frontages 

(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-214. - Bridges. 
Bridges shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access and shall contain architectural elements compatible with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-215. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be hardscape and shall be unobstructed from any element or object for the required width of the sidewalk and for a minimum height of eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. See section 35-684 for provisions related to the location of outdoor dining within sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-216. - Within HM, VL and TN zoning districts. 
(a)  Utility easements shall preserve undisturbed areas for future access and connectivity wherever such opportunities exist or are planned to exist directly adjacent to such easements. 
(b)  Permanent thoroughfare closings are prohibited; instead, traffic calming designs shall be deployed to control traffic volume and speed. 
(c)  Public and private thoroughfares shall be coordinated with a single paving and landscape design. 
(d)  All of the residences within an individual HM, VL or TN zoning district shall be connected by a sidewalk or pedestrian way to every civic area within that individual zoning district. 
(e)  Specific to all non-rural areas. 
(1)  The maximum length for a block is 600 linear feet with the total perimeter length not to exceed 1,680 linear feet and the total area of a block shall not exceed 3.30 acres. 
(2)  Any block face exceeding 600 linear feet shall include a dedicated thoroughfare or open space providing through vehicular and/or pedestrian access. 
(3)  Thoroughfares fronting nonresidential uses shall provide regularly spaced sidewalk amenity areas for the placement of street furniture or bicycle parking. 
(f)  Industrial facilities that require a footprint that cannot be accommodated by the block size specified herein may be permitted to create a larger block provided the following provisions are met: 
(1)  One or more intervening thoroughfares that would divide the block into multiple blocks that conform to the block size requirements shall be platted. 
(2)  The agreement that provides the industrial user the right to build over the underlying right-of-way or access easement contains a reversionary clause providing that if the large scale industrial use ceases, the thoroughfare shall be re-established on the right-of-way or access easement. 
(3)  The industrial user shall fund an escrow account endowing the re-establishment of the thoroughfare. 
(4)  The industrial building that occupies the site shall be constructed with a clear span over the right-of-way or access easement such that the span can be removed without harming the structural integrity of the remaining structures. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.1(E), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-217—35-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - THOROUGHFARES 

Sec. 35-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access easement means the right for one or more persons to access or use another's property. 
Alley means a strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a thoroughfare. 
Avenue means a thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between nonresidential areas, and usually equipped with a landscaped median as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Boulevard means a thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Buffer, district, means the buffer that is external to and separates the non-rural or built up area of a HM-LDR, HM-MDR, HM, VL, TN, or HM-SD district from the rural area and/or the exterior of the district. 
Cul-de-sac means a thoroughfare having only one connection to another thoroughfare, and which is terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Curb means the edge of the thoroughfare pavement that may be raised or flush to a swale, typically incorporating the drainage system. 
Curb cut means a connection between a thoroughfare and a property for vehicular access. curb cut applies to access regardless of the existence of curbing. 
Driveway or drive means a private vehicular access way. 
Highway means a thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Lane means a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas and parking consisting of gravel or landscaped edges, with no raised curb, and drained by percolation as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Path means a pedestrian way traversing an open space or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with a sidewalk network and as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Pedestrian way means a type of thoroughfare designed for non-motorized use. 
Private thoroughfares means roadways constructed to city standards but owned and maintained by a private entity. 
Public thoroughfares means rights-of-way used for access owned and maintained by the federal, state, or local government. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a thoroughfare, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use; generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
Right-of-way, public, means that area, distinguished from an easement or private right-of-way, which is owned in fee-simple title by the governing authority or other government, for the present or future use of thoroughfares together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Right-of-way, private, means that area, distinguished from an easement or public right-of-way, dedicated to property owners of the subdivision involved or to other individuals, and which affords permanent access to abutting property. A private right-of-way is distinguishable from a public right-of-way in that maintenance and ownership of the thoroughfare and accessory improvements is by private individuals or a private association rather than the governing authority or another governmental entity. 
Road means a local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Scenic roadways means those designated thoroughfares containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the city comprehensive plan, including Rico Road, Hutcheson Ferry Road, Cochran Mill Road, Campbellton Redwine Road, Vernon Grove Road, Jones Ferry Road, Wilkerson Mill Road and Rivertown Road. 
Street means a local thoroughfare of low speed and capacity as further regulated in the subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Street furniture means those objects and pieces of equipment installed within the landscape strip including benches, traffic barriers, bollards, mail or post boxes, phone boxes, streetlamps, traffic lights, traffic signs, transit stops, taxi stands, public lavatories, fountains, watering troughs, memorials, public sculptures, waste receptacles and recycling bins. 
Street screen means a wing wall extension of a building facade utilized to screen parking or loading areas located on private property, matching the material and design of the adjacent adjoining building and not located within an open space or sidewalk. 
Sidewalk means a paved area designated for pedestrians which is constructed in accordance with all applicable city standards. 
Thoroughfare, private, means a thoroughfare that has not been accepted for maintenance by the city and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
Thoroughfare, public, means a thoroughfare that is owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.2.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-242. - Thoroughfare provisions. 
(a)  Thoroughfare. The following types of vehicular ways shall further constitute thoroughfares: 
(1)  Existing federal, state, county or municipal thoroughfares; 
(2)  Those constructed as shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law and open to vehicle travel; 
(3)  Those constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the city council; or 
(4)  Those constructed and open to vehicle travel and shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the clerk's office, Fulton County superior court prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Classification of thoroughfares. For purposes of this chapter, all of the thoroughfares in the city, except where otherwise noted, are classified in the city subdivision and land development ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.2.2, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-243—35-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPEN SPACE AND BUFFERS 

Sec. 35-263. - Purpose. 
The purpose of open space is to preserve land in hamlets, villages, and towns in perpetuity. Open space provides residents of the development with opportunities to view and experience nature and agriculture. Nature includes meadows, trees, hiking trails, streams and other wetlands, wildlife in the natural habitat, and granite outcroppings. Nature also includes outdoor space for gatherings and recreation. Agriculture includes pastures and livestock, gardens and orchards and produce. It is expected that a developer will provide access for residents of the hamlet, village, or town to be in the open space, except routine access on farms is not expected. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-264. - Required open space. 
(a)  Open space shall be as set forth in this section and shall be calculated as a percentage of land area within an individual zoning district. See Table 35-461. 
(b)  Open space elements shall be permitted to be located on private or public property. 
(c)  All open space required for the active phase of construction or use shall be fully implemented prior to occupancy and if not completed, an occupancy permit shall not be issued. 
(d)  Open spaces intended for public access or gathering shall provide points of access for emergency vehicles. 
(e)  The minimum amount of total open space shall be set forth for each individual zoning district in Table 35-461. Total open space shall be the sum of preservation areas and civic areas. Such categories are further delineated in this section. 
(f)  The subdivision and land development ordinance shall further regulate the implementation and administration of open space. 
(g)  Lots designated as open space shall be limited to the uses listed in Table 35-265. 
(h)  Open space shall not be isolated. Pedestrian circulation networks shall provide access from the open space to existing and proposed thoroughfare networks, both inside and outside of the district, and connect non-rural areas of the district with city-wide networks outside the district. 
(i)  Land not permanently protected by conservation easement may be used as open space as regulated in this section. However, such unprotected land may not be counted toward the district minimum open space, nor shall it be considered open space to satisfy any other requirement of this chapter. 
(j)  Open space shall be permanently protected according to the requirements in chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-265. - Preservation areas. 
(a)  Preservation areas shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the following subsections: 
(1)  Amount. Preservation areas are open space that is not designated as civic areas. Minimum open space and civic areas are set forth for each individual zoning district in Table 35-461. 
(2)  Uses. The permitted uses allowed in preservation areas shall be as set forth in Table 35-265. 
(3)  Layout. Preservation areas shall be designated as rural areas and shall be designed as set forth in chapter 26. 
(b)  Preservation areas may include land utilized for meeting buffer requirements. However, when buffer areas alone do not fully satisfy the preservation area requirement then additional preservation area shall still be provided. 
Table 35-265. Open Space 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-266. - Civic areas. 
(a)  Civic areas shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the following subsections: 
(1)  Amount. The minimum amount of required civic areas is five percent of the minimum required open space as set forth for each individual zoning district in Table 35-461. 
(2)  Uses. 
a.  The permitted uses allowed in civic areas shall be as set forth in Table 35-265. 
b.  The director may approve the allocation of other civic uses in lieu of those listed when such uses are agreed to be operated or managed by the city or through an MOU with the city for the following uses: city hall, fire stations, police stations, libraries, museums or nature centers. 
c.  The listed civic uses of subsection (a)(2)b of this section shall be limited to a maximum total area of 25 percent of all civic areas provided within an individual zoning district. 
(3)  Layout. Civic areas shall be designated as rural or non-rural and shall be designed as set forth in Table 35-266. 
(4)  Location. Civic areas shall be located within 800 feet of property with any use other than agricultural uses as delineated in Table 35-595. Such individual civic areas shall be a minimum size of either the smallest parcel located within 800 feet of the civic area or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(b)  Civic areas shall be designed so as to: 
(1)  Provide active or passive recreational amenities; 
(2)  Be visible and accessible from the adjacent sidewalk; and 
(3)  Permit and encourage pedestrians to walk on a minimum of 80 percent of the surface of the area excluding fountains, pedestrian furniture, public art and similar elements. 
Table 35-266. Civic Areas 

(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-267. - Demarcation. 
(a)  Lots adjacent to open space shall demarcate the location of the property line adjacent to such open space through the installation of permanent in-ground markers at each adjacent corner of the lot. The design of the in-ground markers shall be approved by the city. 
(b)  Demarcations may alternatively utilize those approved features which achieve permanent visual differentiation between properties to the greatest possible degree. 
(c)  Thoroughfares utilized for purposes of satisfying this requirement shall be continuously connected to at least one other off-site thoroughfare. 
(d)  Any improvements used to satisfy these demarcation requirements shall be continually maintained. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-268. - Landscaping. 
Landscaped areas with grass, trees, shrubs, hedges and/or other landscaping materials shall be approved by the city arborist. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(E), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-269. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Proposed open spaces included in approved zoning plans shall also include information delineating the entity responsible for the ownership, maintenance, and for resolution of issues related to such areas. 
(b)  The entity designated by subsection (a) of this section shall provide adequate maintenance of the open space improvements and shall replace dead plantings when necessary. See the subdivision and land development ordinance for additional regulations related to open space maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(F), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-270. - Above ground stormwater ponds. 
Stormwater ponds functioning as management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple buildings or properties may be permitted to be counted towards required open space provided such facilities contain pedestrian amenities connecting the facility to adjacent uses. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(G), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-271. - Transfer of open space requirements. 
Open space requirements may be transferred to an offsite parcel when meeting the following requirements. 
(1)  The city council finds that the transferred open space provides demonstrably greater value to the community than if the open space were not transferred off site. The council will consider the following in making its determination: 
a.  Whether the off-site preservation protects 120 percent of the acreage otherwise required if not transferred. 
b.  Whether the off-site preservation protects a site currently identified as a "scenic area" in the city's TDR program. 
c.  Whether the off-site preservation connects elements of the city's greenspace network. 
d.  Whether the off-site preservation provides public Chattahoochee River access. 
e.  Whether the off-site preservation protects and/or provides public access to some valued landscape, viewscape, historic site, cultural feature or other valued amenity unique to its site. 
(2)  The following transfer methods may be utilized: 
a.  The purchase of property and subsequent application of a conservation easement to that property in accordance with the open space protection standards in chapter 26; 
b.  The purchase of development rights via the transferable development rights (TDR) program (see chapter 14, article II), where one TDR shall equal one acre of transferred open space requirement; or 
c.  A payment in lieu of direct preservation as regulated under density transfer charges in chapter 14, article II. 
(3)  In no case shall the transfer of open space requirements result in development that does not comply with the remaining regulations of this district. 
(4)  Open space requirements may only be transferred to parcels located within the RL district. 
(5)  Required civic areas shall be required to remain on-site and shall be prohibited from such a transfer. 
(6)  The off-site parcel receiving the open space requirements ("receiving parcel") shall contain the amount of open space otherwise required for any permitted development on said receiving parcel in addition to the transferred amount of open space. 
(7)  Open space requirements fulfilled on a receiving parcel shall be documented on approved zoning and development plans. Such documentation shall include the total amount of open space relocated and the location of the receiving parcel. 
(8)  Once transferred to a receiving parcel, the square footage of such transferred open space shall not be used or credited toward future open space transfers. 
(9)  The maximum amount of the open space requirement that can be transferred off-site as a percentage of the total open space area is as listed below: 
a.  RL district: off-site transfer is prohibited. 
b.  HM districts: ten percent. 
c.  VL district: ten percent. 
d.  TN district: ten percent. 
(10)  Open space requirements transferred to an offsite parcel shall be counted toward the district minimum acreage requirements set forth in Table 35-461. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(H), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-272. - Buffers. 
(a)  Buffer areas to be provided. Buffer areas shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the following subsections: 
(1)  Amount. The minimum amount of required buffer areas shall be as set forth in Table 35-272. In case of conflicting buffer dimension requirements, the largest buffer requirement shall be considered the effective buffer dimension requirement. 
(2)  Uses. The permitted uses allowed in buffer areas shall be as set forth for preservation areas in Table 35-265. Such uses in the buffer areas do not reduce the visual buffering required. 
(3)  Landscaping. Any barren or disturbed portion of the buffer area is to be planted/replanted with a mix of deciduous and evergreen trees at an appropriate replacement size, where soil conditions permit, as approved by the director. 
(4)  Rural character exceptions. 
a.  In the RL district, existing agricultural uses, stand-alone single-family residential uses, and residential minor subdivision lots that are not a part of a farmette development shall not be subject to buffer requirements. 
b.  Any properties within an HM, VL, or TN district that are outside of the district buffer shall be regulated by the RL district standards. 
(b)  Measurements. 
(1)  Zoning district buffers. Buffer dimensions for zoning district boundaries shall be measured as a linear depth from the edge of the designated property boundary or zoning district boundary, or the boundary of any property to which the rural character exception defined subsection (a)(4)b of this section, applies. When such boundary includes a thoroughfare, the dimension shall be measured from the interior edge of the right-of-way of said thoroughfare. 
(2)  Thoroughfare buffers. Buffer dimensions for thoroughfares shall be measured as a linear depth from the edges of the right-of-way. 
(3)  Buildings shall have an additional ten-foot setback interior to buffers. 
(4)  Buffer areas shall have a minimum amount of undisturbed area equal to a minimum of 50 percent of the total required buffer area. Such undisturbed areas shall be planted with evergreen plant material and deciduous trees limited to native species, as permitted by the director. Areas with existing tree coverage may utilize such areas for meeting this calculation. 
(c)  Building visibility. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be located so as to limit visibility to the greatest degree possible from outside of the respective individual zoning district into the district and its prospective development. 
(2)  Where such visibility is unavoidable, additional design features shall be incorporated to minimize visibility including the utilization of exterior earth tone colors, natural materials and architectural features. 
(3)  When landscaping is not sufficient to provide a full visual buffer, the director may require additional screening devices for purposes of providing adequate buffering. Such screening devices may include solid decorative brick walls, wood fences, natural berms, or evergreen hedges, or a combination of said devices. The director may also reduce buffer width requirements when topography provides visual buffering at lesser distances than required. 
Table 35-272. Buffer Standards 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 2.3(I), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-273—35-292. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 35-293. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the city is divided into zoning districts that provide opportunities for residents of the city to conduct business and to interact with nature, with agriculture and with others. The zoning districts of the city are designated as follows: 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-294. - RL, Rural District. 
The RL, Rural District is intended primarily for lower density agricultural and single-family residential uses with individual lot sewage systems. This district is designed to stabilize and protect the rural and residential characteristics of the city and to encourage single-family uses on larger lots. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-295. - HM, Hamlet District. 
The HM, Hamlet District is intended primarily for the creation of larger mixed use communities developed at a low overall density. This district provides a location for agricultural and residential uses to live in close proximity to smaller scaled commercial, office, manufacturing or civic uses complete with design standards and parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form which enhances community aesthetics and limits conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. The Hamlet District consists of four subdistricts: 
(1)  HM-LDR, Hamlet Low-Density Residential District. This HM subdistrict is intended primarily for lower density residential areas. This subdistrict allows agricultural or residential uses to be provided at higher densities than in the RL district. 
(2)  HM-MDR, Hamlet Medium-Density Residential District. This HM subdistrict is intended primarily for medium-density residential areas with community sewage. This subdistrict allows predominantly residential development with additional minor mixed uses. 
(3)  HM-SD, Hamlet Special District. This HM subdistrict is intended for smaller hamlet districts that are focused on a specific use or type of uses consistent with the city's comprehensive plan but not otherwise covered in this article. 
(4)  HM-MU, Hamlet Mixed Use District. This HM subdistrict is intended primarily for medium-density residential areas and mixed use areas. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-296. - VL, Village District. 
The VL, Village District is intended primarily for the creation of larger mixed use communities developed at a medium-density. This district allows agricultural and residential uses to live in close proximity to medium scale commercial, office, manufacturing or civic uses complete with design standards and parameters to reduce the dependence on automobiles, to encourage fine-scale mixed uses, a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form which enhances community aesthetics and limits conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. No part of any VL district shall be within five miles of a TN district or another VL district, as measured in a straight line. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-297. - TN, Town District. 
The TN, Town District is intended primarily for the creation of larger mixed use communities developed at a high density. This district provides a location for agricultural and residential uses to live in close proximity to larger scaled commercial, office, manufacturing or civic uses complete with design standards and parameters to reduce the dependence on automobiles, to encourage fine-scale mixed uses, a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form which enhances community aesthetics and limits conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. No part of any TN district shall be within ten miles of another TN district or within five miles of a VL district, as measured in a straight line. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-298. - PC, Parkway Commercial District. 
The PC, Parkway Commercial District provides opportunities for fully buffered, small scale commercial uses in limited locations along South Fulton Parkway. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.1(E), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-299 - HC, Historic Crossroads District. 
The HC, Historic Crossroads District is intended to reactivate settlements that used to exist at several crossroads identified in the comprehensive plan. This district provides locations for small scale commercial uses and residential uses at higher densities appropriate for a small town center, in a context of historic character. Development in the district is subject to design and architectural standards that are the most specific and strict in the city, along with parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form which enhances community aesthetics and limits conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 1, 7-3-2018) 
Secs. 35-300—35-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 35-330. - Uniform application. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.2(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-331. - ADA compliance. 
In addition to the regulations of this chapter, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities shall also apply, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.2(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-332. - Applicability to land, buildings and open space. 
No building, structure, land, or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, demolished, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.2(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-333. - Measurement of distance. 
All distance measurements of this chapter that do not specify the method of measurement shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line to the nearest property line. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.2(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-334. - License requirements. 
All uses requiring an occupation tax and business license, or other type of license, shall comply with all such licensing requirements and shall not be considered lawful uses under this chapter if in violation of such licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.2(E), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-335—35-356. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 35-357. - Lots and frontages. 
(a)  Lot. 
(1)  A group of two or more contiguous lots owned by the same entity and used for a single use shall be considered a single lot. 
(2)  The term "lot" shall not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
(3)  Lots shall be further regulated by chapter 26. 
(b)  Lot frontage. 
(1)  A property line adjoining a stub thoroughfare shall not be considered as frontage unless it is proposed for access or is the only thoroughfare frontage. 
(2)  In situations where a multiple frontage lot has equal distance on thoroughfare frontages, the director shall determine the legal lot frontage. 
(c)  Lot line, rear. For a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and the most distant from the front lot line, not less than 20 feet long, and wholly within the lot. 
(1)  True triangular lots do not have rear lot lines. Lots with more than one front lot line do not have rear lot lines. 
(2)  The director shall make the final determination of rear lot lines when in dispute or undefined by this definition. 
(d)  Layers. Lots are divided into first, second and third layers according to their position on the lot which control development as established in Table 35-357. 
Table 35-357. Layers 

(e)  Thoroughfare frontage requirements. 
(1)  Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a thoroughfare or open space and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(2)  Lots facing thoroughfares or open spaces on more than one side shall have designated primary frontages and may have secondary frontages. A primary frontage when facing a thoroughfare, shall be that frontage facing the thoroughfare of higher intensity including traffic volume, number of lanes, pedestrian activity, as determined by the director. 
(f)  Lot reduction prohibited. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per dwelling unit or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(g)  Lots not meeting minimum lot size requirements. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or upon amendments thereto, such lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(h)  Lots with wells and septic tanks. Any lot upon which both an individual well and septic tank/drain field are utilized shall be governed by regulations of the county health department. Lots utilizing both a well and a septic tank shall be not less than one acre in size. Any lot proposed to be served by either a well or a septic tank/drain field shall comply with the larger of the minimum lot area required by the county health code or the minimum required for the district in which the lot is located. 
(i)  Limitations on minor subdivisions. Minor subdivisions in HM, VL and TN zoning districts shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Yards. In addition to uses which may be provided for, conditioned or excluded from yards by other sections of this chapter, yards may be used for driveways, signs, parking, loading areas, fountains, flagpoles, yard ornaments, walls, fences, walkways, lawns, buffers, landscape areas, underground utilities, well houses, stormwater management facilities and tree preservation areas. No part of any yard or use made thereof shall serve the requirements for any other lot or structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.3.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-358. - Site improvements and standards. 
(a)  These standards shall regulate site improvement, and the provision of amenities related to site improvement. Below are the minimum standards for all districts. 
(1)  Minimum setback for new public and private streets. The right-of-way for new public streets and the easement or common area for new private streets shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any peripheral property line unless interparcel access is required. 
(2)  Dams. All dams within the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the provisions of the Safe Dam Act and rules of the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  Building setback from pipeline easement. 
a.  Setback requirements. No buildings used for human occupancy shall be permitted within 40 feet of any easement containing a gathering or transmission line. 
b.  Land use restrictions. No building or structure or part thereof, which is used for the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of any material in the following list shall be constructed within 125 feet of any gathering or transmission line easement: 
1.  Corrosive materials. 
2.  Highly toxic materials. 
3.  Oxidizing materials. 
4.  Pyrophoric materials. 
5.  Water reactive materials. 
6.  Highly combustible materials. 
7.  Flammable materials. 
8.  Explosive materials. 
9.  Materials that pose a hazard to human health. 
10.  Loose or combustible materials. 
(4)  Exceptions and exemptions. This subsection shall not apply to: 
a.  Any land disturbance or construction necessary to provide access to a property, when no other reasonable access is permitted, or any building, land disturbance or construction necessary to provide utility service to a parcel of land; 
b.  Any land disturbance or construction on a gathering or transmission line by or on behalf of the owner or operator of the gathering or transmission line; 
c.  Any driveway, street, parking lot, tennis court, volleyball court, play area, recreational area, deck, patio, or any other impervious surfaces. 
(5)  Variance criteria. The reconstruction of any structure existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does not comply with the terms of this subsection (a) may apply for reconstruction on same foot print when safety permits. Any other deviation to the requirements of this section shall require a variance in accordance with section 35-116. 
(6)  Land disturbance permit requirements. In addition to any other requirements contained herein, all land disturbance permit applications shall provide the following: 
a.  A survey by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in the state indicating the location of all gathering or transmission line easements and rights-of-way indicating: 
b.  Gathering or transmission line plan location and depth; 
c.  Gathering or transmission line size; 
d.  The location of all off-site gathering or transmission line easements and rights-of-way within 40 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. 
(7)  Burying of construction material. No person shall bury unused, scrap, waste, excess or discarded construction material. Any person who violates this provision shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to the provisions of sections 35-37 and 35-38. 
(8)  Wastewater pump and lift stations. Wastewater pump and lift stations shall provide a minimum 50-foot buffer and ten-foot improvement setback along all property lines adjacent to residentially and/or agriculturally zoned properties used for residential or public recreational purposes. 
(b)  These standards shall regulate site improvement, and the provision of amenities related to site improvement. Below are additional minimum standards for HM, VL, and TN districts: 
(1)  Off-street parking. Property owners shall provide and maintain off-street parking throughout construction. Parking on any lot other than the lot for which a building permit is issued must be approved for a temporary parking lot by the director. 
(2)  Interparcel access. Interparcel access shall be provided to adjacent properties upon determination by the director that such access is in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  Sidewalks, curb and gutters. Sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be provided in accordance with city standards. 
(4)  Stormwater detention facilities. On-site stormwater detention facilities shall not be located within any required buffer or landscape strip. Detention facilities shall not be located within parking or loading areas unless approved by the department of public works. A 20-foot-wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be provided around the exterior of the detention area outside of the access easement or as may be approved by the city arborist. 
(5)  Compliance with tree preservation ordinance. Prior to applying for a land disturbance permit, the owner shall arrange with the city arborist, through the director of the department of community development, for an on-site evaluation of existing specimen trees and stands of trees, and an evaluation of buffers and tree protection zones, and to ascertain compliance with the tree preservation ordinance found in chapter 14, article IX. At a minimum, the tree density requirements prescribed by the city tree preservation ordinance administrative guidelines shall be provided and permanently maintained. 
(6)  South Fulton Greenway Trail. At the time of application for a land disturbance permit or building permit, development projects with frontage adjacent to the roads identified on the South Fulton Greenway Trail master plan map shall incorporate a multi-use path subject to the approval of the director. Such path shall conform to the entry and exit points of the development project property as designated on the South Fulton Greenway Trail master plan map or as approved by the director, but the detail of the in-site alignment may be amended to suit the needs of the development, provided that in no case shall more than ten percent of the path alignment consist of thoroughfare sidewalks. Paths should be buffered by at least 100 feet of undisturbed buffer wherever practical. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.3.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-359. - Buildings and building areas. 
(a)  Building setbacks. 
(1)  Primary facade setbacks shall be as established in Table 35-359. 
(2)  For buildings with more than one thoroughfare frontage, the sides of the building with frontage shall meet the public frontage and private frontage requirements for that district as specified in Tables 35-213-1, 35-213-2, and 35-213-3. 
Table 35-359. Street Type Dimensions 

 
(b)  Building setback encroachments. 
(1)  Cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, fire chases, chimneys, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features that are a part of an exterior wall of a structure, and fire escapes may extend into the required setbacks, provided such extensions do not exceed three feet. 
(2)  Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks provided such extensions do not exceed ten feet for the primary facade setback, three feet for the side yard and are no closer than ten feet from the property line in the rear yard. 
(3)  Stairs, porches, canopies, fences, walls, outdoor dining areas, seating areas and vending areas shall be permitted within the first layer (Table 35-357), provided sufficient area is preserved within the sidewalk area for safe pedestrian circulation as approved by the director. 
(4)  Cantilevered portions of buildings, including decks and awnings, shall be permitted to extend over the sidewalk provided a minimum vertical ceiling height of 12 feet is maintained over the sidewalk. 
(5)  Encroachments of whole or partial portions of buildings or structures into any public right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
(6)  See Table 35-359 for provisions related to building setbacks. 
(c)  Building height and density. 
(1)  Building heights shall be as established in Table 35-359, except that building heights in HM, VL, and TN districts may be higher if the building is not visible from outside of the district, subject to the approval of the director, the fire department and the city's engineer. 
(2)  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height or bulk limits of this chapter; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller primary facade setbacks, rear yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Building height bonus. Buildings in HM, VL and TN districts shall be permitted an additional height bonus above the respective district maximum height limit in accordance with the following regulations: 
a.  Individual buildings providing senior housing for a minimum of 50 percent of the total building floor area shall be permitted an additional 30 feet of building height; 
b.  Individual buildings that visually terminate the viewshed of a public thoroughfare or open space through use of architectural detailing, massing and delineation shall be permitted an additional 20 feet of building height; and 
c.  Individual buildings within a VL or TN district containing a minimum of 100,000 square feet of any of the following uses shall be permitted an additional 20 feet of building height: communication; industrial and wholesale; transportation and warehousing; educational; places of worship; and public or governmental use. 
(4)  The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to religious institution spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, silos and grain elevators, fire towers, masts, clock towers, cooling towers, water tanks, or mechanical bulkheads. However, such elements shall be prohibited from heights in excess of 199 feet above grade. 
(5)  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of four feet in height. 
(d)  Buildings in non-rural areas. 
(1)  Building orientation in non-rural areas. 
a.  All buildings shall be oriented to face the thoroughfare of greatest intensity or accessible external open space, as determined by the director. 
b.  Individual uses shall have pedestrian entrances directly adjacent to the sidewalk and oriented towards the thoroughfare of higher intensity including traffic volume, number of lanes, pedestrian activity as determined by the director. This requirement shall not be interpreted to prohibit secondary entrances on the sides of buildings. 
c.  Buildings also may be oriented to face a courtyard and individual uses may have pedestrian entrances that open directly to a courtyard 
d.  Residential garages shall be located so as to be directly accessible from the thoroughfare of lesser intensity including traffic volume, number of lanes, pedestrian activity as determined by the director. If oriented to the front of a house, residential garages may not project toward the street. 
e.  Decks and patios may extend to the side or rear yard property line. 
(2)  Fenestration in non-rural areas. 
a.  Display windows and pedestrian entrances shall be provided on all building facades. Such building facades shall be oriented to face the adjacent thoroughfare or open space, and shall be at ground level. Thoroughfares designated as alleys, lanes, bicycle trails, bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, paths, passages and transit routes are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Primary facades for nonresidential uses shall be detailed as storefronts and glazed with clear glass no less than 60 percent of the length of the facade. 
c.  Primary facades for residential uses shall be detailed as residential windows and glazed with clear glass no less than 30 percent of the length of the facade. 
d.  The length of primary facades without intervening fenestration, architectural detailing or entryway shall not exceed 20 feet. 
e.  A maximum of 15 percent of fenestration treatment shall be permitted to utilize architectural detailing in place of glass materials to meet the fenestration treatment requirements. 
f.  Pedestrian entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(3)  Building materials in non-rural areas. Exterior walls or facades visible from any thoroughfare shall utilize brick, glass, wood, stucco, stone or cement-based siding materials. Metal or metallic materials may be permitted but shall not constitute the majority of the material on any individual wall or facade. Thoroughfares designated as alleys, lanes, bicycle trails, bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, paths, passages and transit routes are exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Urban design standards. 
a.  Delineation of building floors at the third story above ground level and lower shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
b.  The primary pedestrian access to all ground level uses and business establishments shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk adjacent to the primary facade. 
c.  Drive-through service windows and associated elements, drives and surface parking facilities shall not be located between a building and any adjacent thoroughfare. 
d.  Buildings with switchboards, power generators, and other telecommunication relay equipment rooms located on the ground floor shall set back those uses for a minimum depth of 60 feet as measured from the building facade. 
e.  For the purposes of this subsection, individual nonresidential uses with more than 60,000 square feet of ground floor level floor area shall be defined as large scale nonresidential uses and shall meet the following additional regulations. 
1.  Such uses shall have their principal frontage only along boulevard or avenue thoroughfare types. 
2.  Such uses shall vary the roof and facade details, patterns and materials for each 300 feet of principal frontage building wall. 
3.  The total number of large scale nonresidential uses shall be limited to four such uses within individual HM districts, six within individual VL districts and ten within individual TN districts. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.3.3, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-360—35-376. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 35-377. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Landscape area means the area of a lot or parcel exclusive of building footprints, driveway, areas devoted to parking and walkway pavements devoted to plants, shrubs, trees and accessory ponds, pools and water features. 
Landscape strip means an area required by this chapter or by conditions of zoning that is reserved for the installation and/or maintenance of plant materials and/or street furniture. 
Native species means a plant occurring within the Piedmont region prior to foreign contact, according to the best scientific and historical documentation. This includes species that are considered indigenous, occurring in natural associations with habitats that existed prior to significant anthropogenic impacts and alteration to the landscape. 
Shrub means a deciduous or evergreen woody plant with single or multiple trunks or multiple leaders and with a mature height generally not expected to exceed 15 feet. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of three inches or more which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Tree, shade, means a deciduous tree planted primarily for its overhead canopy and the quality of the shade it provides. 
Tree, specimen, means a particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade, age, or any other trait that epitomizes the character of the species. 
Tree, street, means a tree planted that is an element of a thoroughfare assembly. 
Tree, understory, means a small to medium size tree with an expected mature height less than 30 feet and a canopy which may or may not offer a sufficient clearance height for pedestrians beneath. 
Tree well means an area of soil around the trunk of a tree encompassing a minimum size of 25 square feet which may further be covered with a metal grating set flush with the adjacent sidewalk pavement. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.3.4.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-378. - Landscape standards. 
The landscape standards in this article shall apply in the HM, VL, and TN districts. See section 35-401(d)(7) for parking lot landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Landscape design standards. 
a.  Native plants are preferred in all cases. In any case, noxious or invasive species are prohibited. 
b.  The spacing and placement of plants shall be adequate and appropriate for the typical size, shape and habit of the plant species at maturity. 
c.  Proposed trees and understory trees shall be centered horizontally; and minimally: 
1.  Two feet from walkways, curbing, and other impervious pavements when planted in a tree well or continuous planter; 
2.  Three feet from walkways, curbing and other impervious pavements when planted in a continuous swale; 
3.  Five feet from thoroughfare lights, underground utilities, utility meters and service lines, fences, walls and other ground level obstructions; 
4.  Six feet from porch eaves, and awnings and similar overhead obstructions associated with the ground level of buildings; 
5.  Eight feet from balconies, verandas, building eaves and cornices, and similar overhead obstructions associated with the upper stories of buildings. 
d.  Proposed trees shall be a minimum height of ten feet and/or three inches in caliper. 
e.  Proposed understory trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and/or 2½ inches in caliper. 
f.  Proposed shrubs shall be of a five-gallon container minimum. Shrubs shall be 18 inches to 24 inches minimum clear from any sidewalk or pavement edge at the lot line. 
g.  Ground vegetation or shrub plantings with spines, thorns or needles that may present hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles are prohibited in the first two feet of the first layer. See Table 35-357. 
h.  Bare and exposed ground on the site and/or in landscaped areas shall be covered with live plant materials and/or mulch, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Naturally occurring dunes, creek beds/arroyos, rock outcroppings or similar landscape features typically lacking in vegetation. 
2.  Agricultural fields seasonally tilled for cultivation. 
3.  Hiking trails and/or traces. 
4.  Clay or sand surfaces associated with recreation fields and facilities. 
i.  Porous paving materials should be used to improve stormwater infiltration on site. 
j.  Artificial plants or artificial turf are prohibited, excluding active recreation fields that are typically subject to intense use and soil compaction which prohibits the establishment of turfgrass, and where paving or grass paving systems will not suffice given the area's purpose and level of use. 
k.  In non-rural areas, all required landscape areas shall be irrigated by an automatic underground irrigation system. 
1.  Where possible and practical, bubbler, drip irrigation, and soaker hose emitters shall be utilized. 
2.  Each irrigation system shall be equipped with a meter, backflow preventer, a rain sensor, and a suitable controller. 
l.  Constructed water features such as fountains, streams and ponds that operate with water recirculation systems shall be designed to prevent seepage and leaks. 
m.  Natural communities and/or areas of naturalized vegetation may be exempt from the installation of irrigation systems. 
n.  The size and limits of existing vegetation shall be indicated on the landscape plan. 
o.  Stormwater detention and retention ponds shall be integrated landscape features, rather than single-purpose flood control and stormwater management ponds. 
p.  Stormwater detention and retention ponds shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and grasses. Plants in basin areas prone to submersion shall be hydrophilic. 
(2)  Landscape construction standards. 
a.  All plant materials shall meet with the minimum container size, class and other requirements outlined in American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA). 
b.  Open spaces shall remain fenced and protected with a temporary construction/silt fence during all adjacent thoroughfare and site work and construction activities unless alterations to them are otherwise specified by the plans. 
c.  The soil structure of planting strips shall be protected from compaction with a temporary construction fence. Standards of access, excavation, movement, storage and backfilling of soils in relation to the construction and maintenance of deep utilities and manholes shall be specified. 
d.  The topsoil within the construction area's limits of disturbance shall be removed, stored and amended with organic soil additives as recommended by a landscape soils test prior to being redistributed. 
e.  Wind erosion shall be mitigated and controlled though dust abatement and similar practices during the period of site work and construction. 
f.  All landscape soils that have been compacted during construction activities shall be loosened, aerated, and reconditioned to a depth of at least six inches before planting to provide an arable topsoil layer that can support the long term health and vitality of landscaping. 
g.  Plants shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems. 
h.  Temporary spray irrigation systems may be used to establish seeded areas for grass and groundcover. 
i.  Existing trees and vegetation should be preserved when possible. Such preservation may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements. 
j.  During construction, the root zones of existing trees and vegetation to be preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary protective fence and protected from clearing or construction activities. 
(3)  Landscape maintenance. 
a.  Native ground covers that do not require irrigation or fertilization are preferred. In any case, all grass and vegetation requiring fertilization shall be lightly fertilized to avoid fertilizer pollution to groundwater, streams and ponds. 
b.  No disturbed ground shall be left exposed. Turfgrass and other approved and appropriate groundcovers or mulch shall cover all non-paved and non-built developed areas. 
c.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or his assigned agent to: 
1.  Maintain and keep all screening and fencing in good condition at all times; 
2.  Maintain landscaping by keeping turfgrass lawns properly mowed and edged, plants properly pruned and disease-free, and planting beds mulched, groomed and weeded, except in the rural area, and other areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth; and 
3.  Replace any required plantings that are significantly damaged, missing, infested, disease-ridden, or dead, within one year or the next planting season, whichever occurs first, except in rural areas and areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.3.4.2, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-379—35-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 35-400. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  This section shall regulate permanent and temporary fences and walls. See outdoor dining supplemental use provisions in section 35-684 for regulations pertaining to fences and walls for outdoor dining when located within sidewalks. 
(2)  Fences and walls which conform to the provisions stated herein shall be permitted by the department of community development. Fences erected for agricultural uses listed in Table 35-595 shall be exempt from permit requirements. 
(3)  Heights of fences, walls, hedges, and other continuous foliage shall be measured from the adjacent top of the thoroughfare curb, surface of an alley, or the official established grade thereof, whichever is higher. Along interior lot lines, the measurement shall be from the average grade of the lot line of the parcel on which the fence is located. 
(4)  Fences, walls and vegetative materials must not obstruct the minimum sight distance requirements which are specified in the subdivision and land development ordinance administered by the director. 
(5)  The director may permit retaining wall heights in excess of the requirements of this section where existing topography so requires. 
(6)  Vehicle gates. 
a.  No part of a vehicle gate shall be located within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, nor shall any gate or vehicle in any way obstruct a public right-of-way, open space area or the minimum sight distance specified in the subdivision and land development ordinance regardless of whether open, closed or in an intermediate position. 
b.  Vehicle gates shall be further limited according to Table 35-400. 
(7)  Fences and walls shall be located a minimum of three feet from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Materials and design. 
(1)  The use of broken glass, projecting nails, concertina wire, spikes or similar materials on fences and walls shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Barbed wire may only be used when associated with agricultural uses and shall be prohibited from use for any single-family uses. 
(3)  Walls and fences shall be limited to brick, wire, wood (or materials designed to have the appearance of natural wood) or stone materials. 
(4)  Fences and walls constructed along all property lines shall be constructed with a finished side toward any adjacent property. 
(5)  Street screens used for screening parking areas shall be located co-planar with the building facade line. 
(6)  Fence styles shall be further limited according to Table 35-400. 
(7)  Permanent fences and walls are prohibited directly beneath cantilevered portions of buildings. 
(8)  Only poles and beams shall be permitted to be located above the top of fences and walls and in excess of the established height limits of this section. Such vertical structures shall be: 
a.  A maximum width and depth of one foot by one foot; 
b.  Located a minimum distance of six feet from any other such vertical structure; and 
c.  Permitted to have a canopy affixed. See section 35-359(b)(3). 
(c)  Regulation based on location. 
(1)  Specific to rural areas. 
a.  Fences and walls shall be limited to four feet in height when located within the first layer, or when within any required buffer. 
b.  Fences and walls shall be limited to eight feet in height when located within any second or third layer, and when outside of any required buffer. 
c.  Transparent deer netting or similar materials are allowed up to 12 feet in height only when associated with uses delineated as agricultural in Table 35-595. 
(2)  Specific to non-rural areas. 
a.  For residential uses. 
1.  Fences and walls within the first layer shall be non-opaque. Opaque fences are permitted for all other locations. 
2.  Fence and wall heights shall be a maximum height of 42 inches in the first layer. 
3.  For all other locations fence and wall heights shall be a maximum of six feet. 
b.  For nonresidential uses. 
1.  Fences are prohibited in the first layer and between any building facade and an adjacent open space. 
2.  Wall heights shall be a maximum of three feet in the first layer and between any building facade and adjacent open space. 
3.  For all other locations fence and wall heights shall be a maximum of eight feet. 
Table 35-400. Fences and Walls 

 
P = Permitted (allowed) 
X = Not permitted 
L = Permitted (allowed) only in second or third layers (Table 35-357) 
R = Permitted (allowed) only for public recreational uses 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-401. - Parking and dumpsters. 
(a)  Parking for zoning districts. Areas dedicated to automobile parking shall be prohibited from being located between the primary facade and the adjacent sidewalk and thoroughfare. Off-street parking requirements for the individual zoning district shall be as set forth in Table 35-401. In the RL district, the table requirements shall be minimum required parking calculations. For all other districts, the table requirements shall be maximum off-street parking requirements. 
(b)  Off-site parking. Required parking shall be permitted to be located off-site, provided: 
(1)  Such parking provides safe and permissible pedestrian circulation and access between the principal structure and off-site parking facilities; and 
(2)  Such parking may not utilize parking spaces that are provided in satisfaction of minimum parking requirements for another parcel. 
Table 35-401. Parking Calculations 

 
(c)  Limitation on trucks and specialty equipment. 
(1)  Trucks and/or trailers exceeding four tons empty weight shall not be stored or parked in the rural areas, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Trucks used in farming the property on which they are located. 
b.  Trucks used in conjunction with a permitted use. 
c.  Trucks engaged in moving household goods or making deliveries. 
d.  A single tractor trailer may be parked at a residence if the owner and driver reside at the address, and it is parked on the buildable area of the lot, in the side or rear yard, no fewer than 200 feet from an off-site residence. 
(2)  Earth moving equipment, tractors or other heavy construction vehicles shall not be stored in rural areas, with the following exceptions: 
a.  During construction under an active building permit and/or land disturbance permit. 
b.  Equipment used in farming the property on which they are located. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles, campers, buses (including school buses), trailers, mobile home coaches, boats and boat trailers may be parked or stored in all districts only under the following conditions: 
a.  That such vehicles are not used as living quarters. 
b.  That the location of the parking or storage area shall be in the buildable area of the lot. 
(d)  Specific to non-rural areas. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Off-street parking or loading area shall not be used for the sale, repair, or dismantling of any vehicle or equipment, or for storage of materials or supplies, except when located within an enclosed garage. 
b.  All surface parking provided on site shall be oriented to the side or rear of the building. 
c.  No surface parking area shall be larger than 65,340 square feet unless separated by a thoroughfare, lane, alley or building. 
d.  On-street surface parking spaces located adjacent to the property line shall be counted toward the minimum number of parking spaces required for that lot. 
e.  Where possible, reverse entry angled on-street surface parking spaces are preferable to front entry orientation. 
f.  Porous paving materials are encouraged in order to increase stormwater infiltration on site. 
(2)  Loading. 
a.  All proposed uses shall provide to the director documentation of all proposed loading areas including information on how such access will ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
b.  Loading areas, service yards, mechanical and electrical equipment and other utilities, including roof-top equipment, shall be screened with evergreen plant material, opaque fences, or structural screens of materials and design matching the exterior building facades. 
c.  On-street loading and servicing zones shall be permitted, provided travel lanes are not used for such purposes. Such on-street loading and servicing zone shall be limited to a maximum of 40 feet per individual block face. 
d.  On-site, off-street loading and service areas shall be at the third layer as indicated in Table 35-357, shall be accessed from alleys when available, and shall be prohibited from facing commercial streets, boulevards or avenues. 
(3)  Dumpsters. 
a.  Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. Restaurants and eateries shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
b.  Dumpster areas, shall be screened with evergreen plant material, opaque fences, or structural screens of materials and design matching the exterior building facades. 
(4)  Off-street bicycle parking. 
a.  Off-street bicycle parking shall be provided at a minimum of one bicycle parking space for every ten vehicular spaces provided, with a minimum of one such space being required. 
b.  After the first 50 required bicycle spaces are provided, additional spaces may be reduced by one-half. 
c.  Required bicycle parking shall be provided in a safe, accessible and convenient location in relation to the pedestrian entrances of the uses that the parking is provided for. 
(5)  Drives and curb cuts. 
a.  When located along highway, boulevard or avenue thoroughfares, curb cuts are prohibited. 
b.  On all other thoroughfares, curb cuts shall be permitted at a maximum width of 24 feet. 
c.  Curb cuts shall be located a minimum distance of 100 feet from any other curb cut. 
d.  Driveways and drop-offs may be located within the first layer. See Table 35-357. 
(6)  Parking decks and structures. 
a.  Parking decks must include a minimum of 25 percent of occupiable floor area (nonresidential) at ground level and the occupiable floor area must be a minimum depth of 60 feet. 
b.  Parking decks shall be constructed to conceal vehicles. 
c.  Parking deck levels shall be predominantly horizontal and flat. 
d.  Parking decks shall include architectural detailing and finish compatible with surrounding buildings. 
e.  Parking deck entrances for pedestrians shall be directly from a sidewalk or path. 
(7)  Site design. 
a.  Off-street parking spaces shall be located with sufficient room for safe and convenient parking without infringing on any public thoroughfare, open space or sidewalk. 
b.  Parking areas on adjoining lots may share curb cuts, driveways and parking spaces subject to a recorded covenant running with the property on which the facilities are located. 
c.  All developments shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five feet connecting ground level parking lots or decks to the adjacent sidewalks, open spaces and building entrances. 
d.  Parking areas that exceed 120 spaces shall include a minimum eight-foot-wide pedestrian walkway. The pavements of such walkways shall be differentiated from parking area pavement through a change in surface texture, material, style, and/or color. 
e.  Parking lots provided as a principal use of property, passenger car rental uses or motor vehicle sales uses shall limit impervious pavement to a maximum of 40 percent of the area utilized for parking. 
(8)  Landscaping and screening. 
a.  When surface parking abuts a thoroughfare right-of-way: 
1.  A street screen shall screen the parking area, at a minimum height of two feet and a maximum height of three feet; or 
2.  A minimum four-foot-wide landscape area shall screen the parking area. within the landscape area, a continuous planting of evergreen shrubs is to be installed at a minimum height of two feet and maintained to a maximum height of four feet. 
b.  Parking lots shall provide minimum ten-foot-wide landscape islands at the end of each parking bay. Such islands shall have a minimum of one tree with a planting area a minimum area of 50 square feet and a minimum width of five feet and shall be planted or covered with other landscape materials. 
c.  Parking rows with more than five parking spaces shall provide an additional landscape island for every six spaces in the row. 
d.  The landscape islands shall be distributed throughout the lot and may be incorporated as a component of a stormwater management plan to facilitate water harvesting. 
e.  Landscape islands may be omitted for solar panel installations or other shading structures of equal or greater coverage. 
f.  All required trees shall be minimum three-inch caliper when planted and shall be of a native shade tree variety which shall attain a minimum mature crown spread greater than 15 feet. A pre-approved list of native shade trees is available from the director. 
(9)  Electric vehicle accommodation. 
a.  Parking lots over a half acre in size shall include two electric car recharging stations for each half acre of parking or portion thereof. For the purposes of this provision, the parking area of a parking deck shall include all surfaces to which vehicles have access. 
b.  Where golf cart parking is allowed on the street, a GFCI outlet shall be installed on the street side of the curb or in the curb in order to eliminate the hazard of extension cords across the sidewalk. The outlet may be controlled by a switch inside the adjacent building. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.2, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 15-10-146, § 2, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 35-402. - Inoperative vehicles. 
(a)  Any automobile, truck, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type, which is inoperable, are hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, and invite plundering and vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare and, when on city thoroughfares, to create a traffic hazard and endanger public safety. 
(b)  Such inoperable vehicles shall not be parked or stand on any private property or public thoroughfares, with the following limited exceptions. 
(1)  Such inoperable vehicles shall be permitted when located behind and fully screened from view of any public right-of-way by permissible fences or walls shall be permitted. 
(2)  A maximum of two such inoperable vehicles shall be permitted on an individual lot when used as rural ornamentation in the RL district. 
(c)  This section shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or contrivances within the incorporated limits of the city, but shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulations and regulatory codes, statutes, or provisions of law heretofore and hereinafter enacted by city, county, state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-403. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  Outdoor storage is permitted in side and rear yards only, and shall be screened so as to prevent visibility from residential uses, thoroughfares and open spaces. 
(b)  Outdoor displays for merchandise which is being offered for sale on premises shall be permitted for nonresidential uses, provided all associated devices or structures: 
(1)  Shall not be permanently secured to the ground; and 
(2)  Shall meet all applicable provisions of this chapter when located within open spaces and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-404. - Cemeteries. 
In a parcel with a cemetery, burial ground, human remains or burial objects, there shall be no land disturbing activity or timbering unless approved by the department of community development. The person or entity seeking a permit shall also comply with O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4. If a parcel is adjacent to a cemetery, there shall be no land disturbance in that parcel unless approved by the department of community development. The following development standards shall be required as a part of the application process for a land disturbance permit or building permit on any parcel with a cemetery or within 50 feet on any parcel adjacent to a cemetery: 
(1)  A report prepared by an archeologist determining the boundary of the cemetery and stating the number of graves believed to be present and their location as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes. 
(2)  A survey of the cemetery prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location of the boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archeologist's report. 
(3)  A 25-foot natural undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided around the perimeter of the outermost burials, as determined by an archeologist, if a cemetery is located on the parcel of land to be developed. If a cemetery is within 25 feet of the parcel to be developed, a 25-foot natural undisturbed buffer with a ten-foot improvement setback shall be provided along common property lines on the parcel where the land disturbance permit or building permit is being sought. 
(4)  A temporary tree protection fence shall be installed on the outer perimeter of the 25-foot undisturbed buffer before any land disturbing activity occurs. If the cemetery is located on an adjacent parcel, the tree protection fence shall be located along common property lines. The temporary tree protection fence shall remain in place until construction is completed. 
(5)  A permanent four-foot-high fence or wall with a gate compliant with this chapter shall be constructed along the perimeter of a cemetery on a parcel for which land disturbing activity is sought. The location of the fence shall be as determined by an archaeologist. If the cemetery is located on an adjacent parcel, the fence shall be located interior to the required buffer and improvement setback or along the common property lines as may be approved by the city arborist. The gate shall have a latch and be four feet wide if the cemetery is inactive or ten feet wide if active. 
(6)  Uninhibited daylight access to the cemetery shall be provided via a 20-foot graveled easement to the cemetery from the nearest public road. The easement shall be recorded in the county courthouse. 
(7)  A maintenance plan for a cemetery located on the parcel for which a land disturbance permit or building permit is sought shall be developed and implemented. 
(8)  The location of a cemetery, as identified by the surveyor, shall be included on the recorded plat. 
(9)  A small plaque/marker with the name of the cemetery, range of burials and any other historical information may be placed on the cemetery fence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-405. - Nuisance. 
No person shall cause or permit on property a nuisance affecting public health. The following are potential nuisances affecting public health and shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Cesspools. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor. 
(2)  Dangerous animals. No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit an animal which is dangerous to the public health or safety to be exposed in public. 
(3)  Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition. 
(4)  Stagnant water. Water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests. 
(5)  Water pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream, drainage ditch or surface drainage by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-406. - Night sky. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from manmade sources. 
(2)  Conformance with applicable codes. All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this section, the building code and the electrical code as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. Where there is conflict between the provisions of this section and other regulations, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. 
(3)  Applicability. For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this section. All building additions or modifications of 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall invoke the requirements of this section for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting 60 percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes of this section. 
(4)  Minor additions. Additions or modifications of less than 25 percent to existing uses, as defined in subsection (a)(3) of this section, and that require a permit, shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this section with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
(5)  Exempt lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
a.  Lighting for pools used at night, controlled by timers and with dimmers; 
b.  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains, controlled by timers and with dimmers; 
c.  Temporary holiday lighting (may be used no more than 60 days per lot per year); 
d.  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
e.  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
f.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline when used for construction or similar temporary activities; 
g.  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of five minutes or less. 
(6)  Prohibited lighting. The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
a.  Aerial lasers; 
b.  Searchlight style lights; 
c.  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2,000,000 candelas or more, except as used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
d.  Mercury vapor lamps; 
e.  Neon lighting not located in HM, VL, or TN districts and not on commercial street, avenue or boulevard thoroughfare types; 
f.  Neon lighting that is not full cutoff in any location. 
(b)  Outdoor lighting standards. All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Shall be full cutoff placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this section (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used). 
(2)  Shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Commercial parking areas. 
a.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, shall be cutoff fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
b.  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be 0.4 footcandles at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. 
c.  Floodlights should be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
d.  Light poles used in parking lots shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(4)  In cases of off-street parking lots, shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right of way in accordance with the following standards: 
Table 35-406. Parking Lot Lighting Standards 

 
(5)  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
(6)  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
(7)  Multi-use development lighting must conform to the standards of its respective use. 
(8)  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line, except the lighting of parking lots shall be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally on the surface. 
(9)  Street lights. All street light fixtures new, repaired (outside of normal maintenance) or replaced fixtures shall be full cutoff. 
(c)  Special uses. All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below shall conform to the lighting standards described in this section. 
(1)  Outdoor sports, recreation fields, or performance areas. Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Facilities designed for municipal leagues, elementary to high school levels of play and training fields for recreational or social levels of play, college play, semi-professional, professional or national levels of play shall utilize luminaries with minimal uplight consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not utilized, acceptable luminaries shall include those which: 
1.  Are provided with internal and/or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize uplight and off-site light trespass and glare; and 
2.  Are installed and maintained so as to avoid aiming no more than 2.5 times the mounting height. 
b.  Illuminance. All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 
c.  Off-site spill. The installation shall also limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the sports facility) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. For all recreational or social levels of play and training fields, as well as, performance areas, illumination levels shall not exceed 1.5 footcandles at any location along any nonresidential property line, and 0.5 footcandles at any location along any residential property line. 
d.  Curfew. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity no later than 10:30 p.m. Illumination of the playing field, court or track shall be permitted after the curfew only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before the curfew due to unusual circumstances. Field lighting for these facilities shall be turned off within 30 minutes after the last event of the night. 
e.  Setback. All light poles shall be set back the greater of 50 feet or one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
(2)  Service station canopies and parking structures. 
a.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
b.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, shall not exceed 50 footcandles. 
c.  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in b, above, shall not exceed 15 footcandles. 
d.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, shall conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
e.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated. 
(3)  Security lighting. 
a.  Security lighting shall be directed toward the targeted area. 
b.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property. Such lighting shall be controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of five minutes or less. 
(4)  Pedestrian path lighting. Lighting post shall not exceed 16 feet from the finished grade. 
(5)  Architectural accent lighting. 
a.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
b.  Lighting fixtures shall not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
(6)  Temporary lighting permits. 
a.  Permits for temporary lighting will be granted by the department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 footcandles and the following conditions apply: 
1.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed can be completed within 30 days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
2.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass and glare. 
3.  Permits issued for temporary recreational lighting shall be extinguished within an hour of the permitted end of the event. 
b.  The application for the temporary lighting permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
2.  Location of proposed luminaire; 
3.  Date and times for the lighting; 
4.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp; 
5.  Type and shielding of proposed luminaries; 
6.  Intended use of the lighting; 
7.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
8.  The nature of the exemption; and 
9.  The means to minimize light trespass and glare. 
(d)  Variances. 
(1)  Any person may submit an application to the city council for a variance from the provisions of this section. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
a.  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior; 
b.  How light trespass, uplighting and glare will be limited 
c.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
(2)  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
(e)  Submission of plans and evidence of compliance. 
(1)  The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of the city in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this section. Even should no other such permit be required, the installation or modification (except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting) shall require submission of the information described below. The submission shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of the city upon application for the required permit: 
a.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
b.  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
c.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
(2)  Additional submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this section will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(3)  Subdivision plats. All new subdivided properties shall submit information as described herein for installed street lights and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
(4)  Certification. For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the certificate of occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.4.7, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-407—35-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DENSITY CONTROLS 

Sec. 35-426. - Purpose. 
The following density control regulations shall govern development within the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-427. - Density unit allocation. 
(a)  The density unit allocation table (Table 35-427) sets forth the allowable square footages for respective uses based on the number of density units provided. 
(b)  Uses listed in Table 35-427 are only permitted according to the permissible densities designated for individual zoning districts in Table 35-461. 
(c)  Uses listed in Table 35-427 are only permitted for the permitted principal uses designated for individual zoning districts in Table 35-595. 
(d)  Density unit allocation calculations are not required for the allocation of accessory dwellings, agricultural uses with less than 25,000 square feet of floor area or for accessory uses containing no floor area. 
Table 35-427. Density Unit Allocation 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.5(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-428. - Baseline density. 
Base density is delineated in Table 35-461. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.5(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-429. - Minimum density. 
For zoning districts that have a minimum density greater than baseline density, as presented in Table 35-461, the additional density above baseline density shall be required to be entitled according to the methods described in the transferable development rights ordinance in article II of chapter 14. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.5(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-430. - Additional density. 
Additional density units for a property may only be added in excess of the baseline density when a property is located within an individual zoning district that enables density greater than the baseline density (Table 35-461) and whenever a property utilizes any of the following procedures for obtaining increased density units: 
(1)  The transfer of development rights. Article II of chapter 14 further establishes the transferable development rights provisions governing the ability to relocate density unit permission from parcel to parcel within the city; 
(2)  Increased open space. The allocation of additional open space within individual HM-SD, HM-MDR, HM-MU, VL and TN zoning districts shall enable a density unit increase equal to one percent of the baseline density for each one percent of additional open space that is provided in an amount greater than the open space calculation in Table 35-461. 
(3)  Civic uses. City halls, fire stations, police stations, libraries, and museums shall qualify for addition density as further regulated herein: 
a.  Such uses must be agreed to be operated or managed by the city; 
b.  The floor area for such uses shall: 
1.  Be permitted to be exempt from density calculations of the individual zoning district; 
2.  Enable an additional one square foot of additional density permitted within the individual zoning district for every one square foot of such use provided; and 
3.  Remain any of the identified civic uses for a minimum of five years. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.5(D), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-431—35-458. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DISTRICT CONTROLS 

Sec. 35-459. - Purpose. 
The following district control regulations shall govern development within each applicable district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-460. - Additional zoning district provisions. 
(a)  RL districts. RL districts may be subdivided as three development types: single lot, minor subdivision and farmette development types. Such development types shall comply with the city subdivision code and the development controls established in Table 35-461, as well as all other regulations in this chapter. 
(b)  Additional HM district provisions. HM districts subdistricts shall be further regulated as follows: 
(1)  All HM subdistricts shall meet all regulations of this chapter that apply to HM districts. 
(2)  HM-LDR subdistricts may utilize individual lot sewage systems. Such subdistricts shall be further limited to permit only those uses designated as agricultural or residential uses for the HM district in Table 35-595. 
(3)  HM-MDR subdistricts shall be predominantly residential allowing those uses designated for the HM district in Table 35-595. 
(4)  HM-SD subdistricts shall only be utilized for specialized HM districts that are further designated as special districts. Such subdistricts shall be utilized to promote the purposes set forth in the comprehensive plan and other officially adopted plans of the city and shall be further regulated and delineated as set forth in division 8 of this article. 
(5)  HM-MU subdistricts shall be mixed use. Such subdistricts shall allow those uses designated for the HM district in Table 35-595. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-461. - Development controls. 
(a)  The development controls table in subsection (d) of this section sets forth the space dimensions required for each zoning district and subdistrict. 
(b)  In order to develop at densities greater than the baseline density, the methods described in section 35-430 shall be used. 
(c)  Definitions. Calculations within Table 35-461 in subsection (d) of this section shall be further defined as follows: 
Acreage maximum means the maximum total acreage required to be provided within each individual zoning district. 
Acreage minimum means the minimum total acreage required to be provided within each individual zoning district. 
Baseline density means the number of density units per acre of property within each individual zoning district for all approved uses, as regulated by Table 35-461 in subsection (d) of this section, before the application of any transferable development rights, density transfer credits, or density bonuses. Actual development densities may be higher, up to the development per acre maximum using the methods described in the TDR ordinance in chapter 14, article II, or lower. 
Density per acre maximum means the maximum total number of density units that are permitted for every one acre of property within each individual zoning district for all approved uses. 
Nonresidential density maximum means the maximum percentage of allowable density units permitted to be provided within each individual zoning district for uses listed in Table 35-595 that are not designated as agricultural or residential uses. 
Nonresidential density minimum means the minimum percentage of allowable density units required to be provided within each individual zoning district for uses listed in Table 35-595 that are not designated as agricultural or residential uses. 
Open space minimum means the minimum amount of land area within the individual zoning district required to be open space (see article VI, division 4 of this chapter). Land permanently protected by a conservation easement prior to being rezoned into an HM, VL, TN, or PC district shall not be included in calculations of open space required or of open space provided. 
(d)  See division 3 of this article for additional provisions for primary facade setback, side yard setback, rear yard setback, lot area, building height and frontage buildout. 
Table 35-461. Development Controls Table 

 
;hn0; (Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-462. - Mixed use concurrency. 
Residential uses and nonresidential uses shall have additional requirements of concurrency when such uses are provided within individual HM-MU, VL and TN zoning districts and as further regulated herein. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-463. - Provision for transit. 
Each VL or TN district shall reserve a transit station site, for service to that district, along with a transit corridor linking the transit station site to the South Fulton Parkway Right-of-Way corridor, according to the requirements found in chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-464. - District expansion. 
In order for a zoning district to expand and incorporate neighboring properties that, alone, do not meet the minimum requirements of the district, the following rules shall be met: 
(1)  The proposed district expansion shall be master planned: The applicant shall submit a site plan and other application materials that demonstrate that the project complements and is in harmony with the existing district. 
(2)  The site plan and other application materials for the proposed district expansion shall be reviewed by the homeowner's association of the existing district; the HOA shall make a recommendation to the planning commission and the city council as to the appropriateness of the district expansion plan. The planning commission and the city council shall consider the recommendation in the approval or denial of the application. 
(3)  Entitlements. Only the density units that are available with the expansion property shall accrue to that property. Unused density units that are available based on the district-wide baseline density or the district-wide maximum density shall be applied to the expansion property only by agreement with the HOA. Additional development rights may be transferred in accordance with the TDR program, as described in chapter 14. 
(4)  All provisions of Table 35-461 related to density per acre, nonresidential density, and open space shall be calculated and applied internally to the proposed expansion, and independent of the existing district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.6(E), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-465—35-481. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PC, PARKWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 35-482. - PC, Parkway Commercial District. 
The regulations set forth herein are the regulations for the parkway commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.7, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-483. - Statement of intent. 
The purpose and intent of establishing the PC, Parkway Commercial District is as follows: 
(1)  Provide opportunities for appropriately scaled commercial development for the rural areas of the city outside of the hamlet, village, and town districts; 
(2)  Prohibit or place reasonable controls on the development of inappropriate large scale highway-oriented retail, service, office and dining uses which are intended to serve larger areas of the city than the rural area of this community; 
(3)  Alleviate development pressure on the surrounding rural area by placing reasonable controls on development and expansion of strip commercial uses; 
(4)  Improve the quality of air and water in commercial areas through provisions for the planting of trees, greenspace protection, bicycle parking and electric vehicle parking; 
(5)  Encourage a grid of connected thoroughfares to improve access and reduce congestion; 
(6)  Facilitate safe, attractive and convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles; 
(7)  Encourage pedestrian flow through the design of buildings with ground level uses; 
(8)  Improve pedestrian access within the district and to and from the surrounding areas; 
(9)  Establish building facade lines and sidewalk requirements, and reserve the space between buildings and the thoroughfare for pedestrian functions; 
(10)  Provide services to the residents of the rural areas of the city and prevent commercial development that is inappropriate for its rural context; and 
(11)  To meet these needs in a fashion that supports the rural vision and brand as expressed in the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.7(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-484. - Incorporation of general regulations. 
The general regulations found in this chapter for HM-MU districts are applicable to this district except where specific regulations are further established for this Parkway Commercial District below. 
(1)  Only the following uses shall be permitted, and only to the degree listed, for HM districts in Table 35-595: 
a.  Agricultural uses. 
b.  Retail uses. 
c.  Gas stations (all pumps must be behind building). 
d.  Services uses. 
e.  Office, professional as listed in technical uses. 
f.  Places of worship, as listed in arts, entertainment and recreation uses. 
g.  Restaurants and eateries, as listed in accommodation and food service uses. 
h.  Residential uses. 
(2)  Residential uses shall be regulated consistent with the RL district. 
(3)  As defined in section 35-461, baseline density shall be one unit per acre, density per acre maximum shall be one unit per acre, nonresidential density maximum shall be 100 percent, and minimum open space shall be 70 percent. 
(4)  Minimum lot size shall be four acres. 
(5)  Preservation open space shall not be transferred off-site, and shall not be transferred from off-site. 
(6)  Rear yard setbacks for nonresidential uses shall be ten feet. Side yard setbacks for nonresidential uses shall be ten feet when adjacent to open space, and zero feet when adjacent to another nonresidential use. 
(7)  Single-family detached uses on individual lots shall not be required to provide open space or buffers. This exemption shall not apply to single-family detached uses that are a part of a master planned development including multiple subdivided lots. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.7(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-485. - District size and location. 
(a)  The maximum size of a PC district is 12 acres. 
(b)  No structures within any PC district shall lie more than 1,000 feet from the right-of-way of South Fulton Parkway, or more than 1,000 feet from the right-of-way of any street intersecting with South Fulton Parkway. 
(c)  Maximum total commercial floor area shall be 10,000 square feet per district. 
(d)  PC districts may be incorporated into future contiguous/adjacent HM, VL, and TN districts. In such cases, the buffers between those districts may be relieved, and the PC district will be governed by the criteria for the applicable HM, VL, and TN district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.7(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-486. - Establishment of form and design controls. 
The following regulations shall govern the form and design of development in the PC district: 
(1)  All structures and improvements shall be architecturally consistent with historic rural vernacular styles common in the Piedmont or southeastern region of the United States. Approval may be contingent on proof of such consistency, as determined by approval of the director, planning commission, and city council. 
(2)  Vehicular access shall be derived from internal thoroughfares and all buildings shall front internal thoroughfares. District entrances shall be derived only from Campbellton-Redwine Road, Capps Ferry Road, Rico Road, or Cochran Mill Road. No more than one entrance shall be permitted per 700 feet of street frontage. Both vehicular and pedestrian interparcel access shall be provided among adjacent properties. Driveways, parking lots, and pedestrian access shall be shared. Direct thoroughfare connections shall be provided for both vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent HM, VL, or TN districts. 
(3)  Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and maximize tree preservation in siting of buildings, drives, and parking facilities. The city arborist shall review tree preservation plans. 
(4)  Building height shall be limited to a maximum of 35 feet. 
(5)  Internal frontages shall be detailed with street trees and street parking, along with architecturally-consistent street furniture, including pedestrian lighting, benches, trash receptacles, and bicycle racks. 

(6)  All buildings and parking facilities within the district shall be connected by sidewalks with a minimum width of eight feet. 
(7)  The district's pedestrian network shall be extended to the edges of the district to provide opportunities for connection to existing or planned path networks. 
(8)  The district site plan shall include a location for a grease trap for any use which anticipates cooking. 
(9)  PC districts may use well and septic. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.7(D), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-487—35-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS: GENERAL 

Sec. 35-511. - Creation of special districts. 
These regulations permit the creation of HM-SD districts only in areas which meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Are designated as a special district on the future development map of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Are in accord with and serve to promote the purposes set forth in the comprehensive plan and other officially adopted plans of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  Encourage land use and development in substantial accord with the physical design set forth in the comprehensive plan and other official adopted plans of the city; 
(4)  Are officially designated as having special and substantial public interest in protection of an existing or proposed unique character including, as appropriate, surrounding such areas, and/or a high economic value to the city; 
(5)  Contribute to the open space protections of the comprehensive plan at levels similar to other current districts; 
(6)  Repeal and replace existing zoning regulations, for the accomplishment of special public purposes for which the district was established in cases where special and substantial public interest requires such modification of existing zoning regulations; 
(7)  Documented through public processes of being eligible to support a mixture of uses, densities and/or development characteristics that are not as easily facilitated in other zoning districts; 
(8)  All of the parcels of the individual district shall be contiguous and located within the boundary of the individual district; and 
(9)  Where applicable, serve to protect and preserve, as appropriate, individual buildings or grounds where there is special and substantial public interest in protecting such buildings and their visual environment. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.8(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-512. - Nominations. 
(a)  Nominations to create a new special district or to amend the boundaries of an existing special district may be initiated by city council, the director or a minimum of 50 percent of the total number of properties within the proposed district subject to the approval of the director. 
(b)  Nominations by city council shall be in the form of a resolution requesting the director to prepare a recommendation. The nomination shall contain information and suggestions concerning the areas, buildings, and/or premises proposed for such regulations sufficient for the director to prepare a recommendation. 
(c)  Nominations by property owners shall be in the form of nomination applications to the director on forms provided for such purpose and shall be deemed to be complete at such time as all supporting required documentation has been provided. 
(d)  No recommendation on a nomination will proceed without a complete application. When an application is complete, the director shall prepare a recommendation to the planning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.8(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-513. - Recommendations. 
(a)  Recommendations concerning the establishment of a special district shall be prepared by the director for review. Favorable recommendations shall include an ordinance legislating creation of the district. Each favorable recommendation and associated ordinance shall identify the proposed zoning by the HM-SD prefix and a number generated by the director identifying the particular district, for example "HM-SD1." The identification may also include language indicating the character or location of the district. 
(b)  Such ordinance shall proceed for city council consideration in the same manner as any other similar zoning proposal. All such application shall be reviewed by the city council. 
(c)  The recommendation of the director (the "recommendation") shall contain the following items which shall be transmitted to the planning commission for its review. The recommendation shall be prepared only for the purpose of assisting in the evaluation of the special district ordinance and shall not become a part of the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Comment on proposed district boundaries. The recommendation shall include a map indicating: 
a.  The boundaries of the special district and any subareas established within the district for purposes of special district regulations. 
b.  The location and designation of zoning districts or portions of districts, if any, to be supplanted by special district zoning. 
(2)  Staff report. Each recommendation submitted to the city council shall include a narrative staff report stating whether the director supports the proposed nomination of the district for special district designation, based upon whether the HM-SD regulations are appropriate for the nominated area, and may include such additional information and suggestions on the area, buildings and premises under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.8(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-514. - Contents of the district ordinance. 
Each ordinance creating a special district shall contain the following: 
(1)  District boundaries. The ordinance shall include a map indicating the boundaries of the individual HM-SD district. 
(2)  Statement of intent. Each HM-SD district ordinance shall incorporate a particularized statement of intent appropriate to the individual district being created, establishing the purpose and justification for the creation of the district. 
(3)  Incorporation of general regulations. Each HM-SD district shall specify that the general regulations found in this chapter for HM districts are applicable to the HM-SD district created except to the extent authorized in subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  Tailoring of regulations. Subject to this subsection, specific regulations may be established for each HM-SD district and such regulations shall be contained in the individual district ordinance. The individual district ordinance shall further specify when any of the below revised regulations apply to only portions of the HM-SD district and not the entire district as a whole. Specific regulations for an individual HM-SD district that revise the general regulations for HM districts shall be limited to the following: 
a.  The total number of large scale nonresidential uses may be revised. 
b.  Maximum block sizes may be revised. 
c.  Minimum and maximum parking calculations for HM districts in Table 35-401 may be revised. 
d.  Uses as listed in Table 35-595 permitted use table for the HM district may be restricted, limited or prohibited but shall not be expanded. Uses not allowed within the HM district in article VIII, division 2 shall be prohibited in all HM-SD districts. 
e.  Uses may be further limited by specifying the number of such uses, the size of such uses or the hours of operation for such uses. 
f.  Total acreage and lot size may be specified but shall not exceed the limitations of Table 35-461 for HM-SD districts. 
g.  Density and preservation open space for HM-SD districts in Table 35-461 may be increased or reduced. 
h.  The maximum amount of open space that may be transferred may be increased or reduced. 
i.  The district provisions for HM districts regarding primary facade setback, side yard setback, rear yard setback, building height, frontage buildout, civic space types and thoroughfare types may be revised. 
j.  Additional form, design, and/or landscaping standards may be established. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.8(D), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-515—35-536. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS: INDIVIDUAL 

Sec. 35-537. - HM-SD1, Rico Crossroads Community Special District. 
The regulations set forth herein are the regulations for the HM-SD1 Rico Crossroads Community Special District. 
(1)  Statement of intent. The purpose and intent of establishing this HM-SD1 district is as follows: 
a.  Protect the existing old Rico commercial area from uses and building forms which are incompatible with the scale, character and needs of the surrounding area; 
b.  Preserve and restore existing, traditional and pedestrian scale buildings in this established historic commercial crossroads; 
c.  Promote historic small scale, local-serving commercial uses in established historic commercial crossroads; 
d.  Prohibit or place reasonable controls on the development of inappropriate large scale, highway-oriented retail, service, office and dining uses which are intended to serve larger areas of the city than the rural area of this community; 
e.  Alleviate development pressure on the surrounding rural area by placing reasonable controls on development and expansion of strip commercial uses, especially at the fringes of this district; 
f.  Facilitate safe, attractive and convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles; 
g.  Encourage pedestrian flow through the design of buildings with ground level uses, that open directly onto sidewalks adjacent to public thoroughfares; 
h.  Establish building facade lines and sidewalk requirements, and reserve the space between buildings and the thoroughfare for pedestrian movement; and 
i.  Promote a nodal form of small scale historic commercial development that other zoning districts are unable to properly facilitate. 
(2)  Incorporation of general regulations. 
a.  The general regulations found in this chapter for HM districts are applicable to this district except where specific regulations are further established for this HM-SD1 district below. 
b.  Only the following uses shall be permitted, and only to the degree listed, for HM Districts in Table 35-595: 
1.  Agricultural uses. 
2.  Retail uses. 
3.  Services uses. 
4.  Office, professional as listed in technical uses. 
5.  Places of worship, as listed in arts, entertainment and recreation uses. 
6.  Restaurants and eateries, as listed in accommodation and food service uses. 
7.  Residential uses provided they are located in the second or higher story of a building. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.9(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-538. - HM-SD2, Campbellton Crossroads Community Special District. 
The regulations set forth herein are the regulations for the HM-SD2 Campbellton Crossroads Community Special District. 
(1)  Statement of intent. The purpose and intent of establishing this HM-SD2 district is as follows: 
a.  Protect the existing old Campbellton commercial area from uses and building forms which are incompatible with the scale, character and needs of the surrounding area; 
b.  Preserve and restore existing, traditional and pedestrian scale buildings in this established historic commercial crossroads; 
c.  Promote historic small scale, local-serving commercial uses in established historic commercial crossroads; 
d.  Prohibit or place reasonable controls on the development of inappropriate large scale, highway-oriented retail, service, office and dining uses which are intended to serve larger areas of the city than the rural area of this community; 
e.  Alleviate development pressure on the surrounding rural area by placing reasonable controls on development and expansion of strip commercial uses, especially at the fringes of this district; 
f.  Facilitate safe, attractive and convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles; 
g.  Encourage pedestrian flow through the design of buildings with ground level uses, that open directly onto sidewalks adjacent to public thoroughfares; 
h.  Establish building facade lines and sidewalk requirements, and reserve the space between buildings and the thoroughfare for pedestrian movement; and 
i.  Promote a nodal form of small scale historic commercial development that other zoning districts are unable to properly facilitate. 
(2)  Incorporation of general regulations. 
a.  The general regulations found in this chapter for HM districts are applicable to this district except where specific regulations are further established for this HM-SD2 district below. 
b.  Only the following uses shall be permitted, and only to the degree listed, for HM districts in Table 35-595: 
1.  Agricultural uses. 
2.  Retail uses. 
3.  Services uses. 
4.  Office, professional as listed in technical uses. 
5.  Places of worship, as listed in arts, entertainment and recreation uses. 
6.  Restaurants and eateries, as listed in accommodation and food service uses. 
7.  Residential uses provided they are located in the second or higher story of a building. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 3.9(B), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-539—35-549. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - HC, HISTORIC CROSSROADS DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-07-182, § 2, adopted July 3, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as div. 11, §§ 35-539—35-551. To preserve the numbering style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as div. 11, §§ 35-550—35-562. 

Sec. 35-550. - Historic crossroads district. 
The regulations set forth herein are the regulations for the Historic Crossroads District. 
(1)  Statement of intent. The purpose and intent of establishing the HC, Historic Crossroads District is as follows: 
a.  Reconstitute historic crossroads communities as identified in the city's comprehensive plan and the future development map as viable downtown districts with authentic historic character; 
b.  Create walkable centers where people can live work, play and worship without requiring the use of a car; 
c.  Provide retail, service, and employment opportunities to the residents of Chattahoochee Hills and the surrounding communities; 
d.  Provide opportunities for incremental development within a defined framework of streetscapes and building form; 
e.  Provide opportunities for economic development; 
f.  Provide opportunities for recreation and neighborhood-oriented, neighborhood-friendly entertainment; 
g.  Provide opportunities for development densities that drive permanent preservation of rural land as defined in section 35-430, additional density; 
h.  Provide access to nature and opportunities to experience nature; 
i.  Prohibit or place reasonable controls on the development of inappropriate large-scale highway-oriented retail, service, office and dining uses which are intended to serve larger areas of the city than the rural area of this community; 
j.  Improve the quality of air and water in commercial areas through provisions for the planting of trees, greenspace protection, bicycle parking and electric vehicle parking; 
k.  Encourage a grid of connected thoroughfares to improve access and reduce congestion; 
l.  Facilitate safe, attractive and convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles; and 
m.  To meet these needs in a fashion that supports the rural vision and brand as expressed in the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-551. - Incorporation of general regulations. 
The general regulations found in this chapter for HM districts are applicable to this district except where specific regulations are further established for this HC district below. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-552. - Tailoring of regulations. 
The following specific regulations for the HC district revise the general regulations for HM: 
(1)  The following uses shall be permitted only to the degree listed for HM districts in table 35-595. All other uses shall be permitted to the degree listed for the RL district in table 35-595. 
a.  Agricultural uses. 
b.  Retail uses. 
c.  Services uses. 
d.  Professional services as listed in technical uses. 
e.  Places of worship, as listed in arts, entertainment and recreation uses. 
f.  Restaurants and eateries, as listed in accommodation and food service uses. 
g.  Residential uses. 
(2)  HM district open space requirements shall apply to all property in the district except single-family detached houses that are not a part of a master planned development. Up to 100 percent of the preservation open space requirement may be transferred off-site according to the rules found in section 35-271 (Transfer of open space requirements). 
(3)  Development controls table. The following table shall control the dimensional requirements of the HC district. All definitions and notes associated with the development controls table in section 35-461 shall apply. 

 
(4)  Rear yard setbacks for nonresidential uses shall be ten feet. Side yard setbacks for nonresidential uses shall be ten feet when adjacent to open space, and zero feet when adjacent to another nonresidential use. 
(5)  The district buffers described in section 35-272 shall not be required. 
(6)  The total number of large scale nonresidential uses as defined in section 35-359 (buildings and building areas) shall be zero. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-553. - Specimen tree preservation. 
A specimen tree survey shall be submitted with application for a land disturbance permit. The landscape plan should demonstrate the preservation of specimen trees to the maximum extent possible, including all specimen trees not within 50 feet of a building footprint or underground tank and not within 70 feet of a gas pump. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-554. - Landscape plan required. 
A landscape plan is required prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. The landscape plan shall be submitted for review by the city arborist and for approval by the director. Such landscape plan shall show the following, at a minimum: 
(1)  Existing and preserved specimen trees. 
(2)  Large shade trees shall be required every 40 feet along all thoroughfares. The applicant's landscape plan may redistribute trees in irregular arrangements where regular rows of street trees are not desirable, as approved by city council. 
(3)  Parking lot plantings as required in section 35-401(d)(8) 
(4)  A two-year landscape maintenance bond equal to 100 percent of the replacement value of the landscaping may be required by the city 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-555. - Stormwater design. 
Stormwater features shall be designed as natural site features and integrated with the landscape as much as possible. All stormwater features shall be consistent with the Light Imprint Handbook. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-556. - Sidewalk requirements. 
Sidewalks shall connect every entrance and every parking area in the district with a pedestrian-friendly, easily navigable pedestrian network. Pedestrian lighting is required throughout. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-557 - Open space preservation. 
Land designated as open space in the HC district may share a lot with uses not listed on Table 35-265. Acceptable preservation mechanisms may be expanded to include permanent restrictive covenant, as approved by City Council. All other open space provisions are as described in Article VI, Division 4 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-558. - Establishment of form and design controls. 
The following regulations shall govern the form and design of development in the HC district: 
(1)  All structures and improvements shall be architecturally consistent with historic pre-World War II rural, crossroads, or small-town styles common in the Piedmont or southeastern region of the United States. Approval may be contingent on proof of such consistency, as determined by approval of the director, planning commission, and city council. 
(2)  Vehicular access shall be derived from internal thoroughfares and all buildings shall front internal thoroughfares. Both vehicular and pedestrian interparcel access shall be provided among adjacent properties. Driveways, parking lots, and pedestrian access shall be shared. Direct thoroughfare connections shall be provided for both vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent HM, VL, or TN districts. 
(3)  Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and maximize tree preservation in siting of buildings, drives, and parking facilities. The city arborist shall review tree preservation plans. 
(4)  Building height shall be limited to a maximum of 50 feet. 
(5)  First floor ceiling heights shall be a minimum of 14 feet 
(6)  Gas station canopies shall have pitched roofs, no shallower than 5:12, and shall be covered in shingles, shakes, or traditional standing-seam metal. 
(7)  All street frontages shall be detailed with street trees and street parking, along with architecturally-consistent street furniture, including pedestrian lighting, benches, trash receptacles, and bicycle racks. 
(8)  Buildings: 
a.  Materials. Exterior walls or facades shall utilize brick, glass, wood, stucco, stone or cement-based siding materials. Brick siding shall be painted or coated unless recycled brick or other antique finish is approved by the city. When used, lap siding shall be applied with a 4 ½ inch reveal. Materials and style should be consistent on all sides of the building. Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced concrete block; tilt-up concrete panels; prefabricated steel panels; highly reflective, shiny, or mirror-like materials; mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or door frames; exposed, unfinished foundation walls; exposed plywood or particle board; or unplastered, exposed concrete masonry blocks. Material or color changes generally should occur at a change of plane. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in material should be avoided. 
b.  Color. Paint colors shall be chosen from Sherwin Williams "Color Through the Decades" collections from 1850 - 1930 or the Benjamin Moore Historical Collection, or similar historical palette as approved by the city. Unpainted surfaces shall be muted natural and earth tones. Buildings should be a single color with a complementary trim color. Bright colors or franchise colors are permitted as accents only. 
c.  Windows and doors. Windows shall be vertical in proportion and topped with an appropriately-proportioned lintel or arch. Windows and doors shall be made of wood. Windows that are openable shall be double hung. 
d.  Roofs. Pitched roofs shall have pitches equal to or greater than 8:12, except that shed roofs on additions or porches may be shallower. Main roofs that are pitched shallower than 5:12 shall be enclosed by a parapet wall tall enough to screen the roof and the equipment on it, and at least 48 inches tall. The parapet wall shall be of a design and materials consistent with the building façade. Pitched roofs shall be traditional materials and treatments, appropriate to the historical style of the building. Facades should have a well-defined cornice with appropriate cornice returns on gabled roofs. 
e.  Doorways. Doorways shall be recessed unless under an awning or a porch with a depth of eight feet or greater. 
f.  [Historically accurate architectural elements.] Buildings shall include historically accurate architectural elements such as columns, arcades, covered entry-walkways, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, recesses. 
g.  [Exceptions.] Exceptions may be approved for design, color, or roof pitch when the application is accompanied with appropriate documented historical antecedents and approved by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-559. - Building permit review and approval. 
(a)  Architectural plans for all buildings in the HC district must be approved by the city council prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Building permit applications shall be accompanied with color elevations accurately depicting materials, finishes, colors, etc. of all elements, including the primary structure, accessory structures, fences, awnings, and other appurtenances. Materials samples are encouraged to provide a better understanding of the proposal. 
(c)  City council approval of the final site plan is required before the issuance of a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-560. - Highway oriented retail alternative standards. 
(a)  Property with frontage on Cascade Palmetto Highway (State Highway 154) and buildings within 400 feet of the Cascade Palmetto Highway (State Highway 154) right-of way and within 700 feet of Campbellton Fairburn Road (State Highway 92) right-of-way may optionally follow the following alternative regulations. These alternative regulations shall be applied in addition to HC regulations, above, and all other regulations, except as specifically modified below. Developments utilizing the exceptions in (b), below, must also comply with the additional requirements listed in this section. 
(b)  The following exceptions from form and design controls apply only to property and buildings defined in (a), above: 
(1)  Maximum block face, block perimeter, and block area shall be eliminated. (Modifies 35-216 (e)) 
(2)  Surface parking and drives shall be permitted in front of the building (Modifies 35-401(d)and 35-359(d)(4)c) 
(3)  Parking maximums for retail and restaurant uses shall be increased to eight spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
(4)  Nonresidential Density Maximum shall be increased to 100% [modifies 35-541(c), above] 
(c)  Inter-parcel access for both vehicles and pedestrians shall be provided among adjacent properties. Driveways, parking lots, and pedestrian access shall be shared. 
(d)  Provisions for outdoor dining shall be provided for every restaurant use. Such areas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be landscaped and shaded by shade trees or awnings or the equivalent. 
(2)  They shall be connected to the restaurant by sidewalks a minimum of six feet in width. 
(3)  They are not required to be paved. 
(4)  They must include trash receptacles. Such receptacles must be kept in good condition and shall not be allowed to overflow. 
(5)  The amount of outdoor dining area to be provided shall me a minimum of 40 percent of the area of the indoor dining area. 
(6)  Provisions meeting outdoor dining area requirements may be shared among all restaurant uses on a site, provided that the total area required is not reduced. 
(e)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Continuous sidewalks with a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along all road frontages 
(2)  Continuous sidewalks with a minimum width of eight feet shall be provided along all building frontages, including marked crosswalks across driving lanes, connecting all customer entrances. Where the sidewalks run parallel to parking spaces, they shall be treated as sidewalks above the curb with a minimum three foot wide landscaped area running parallel to the sidewalk, rather than as long crosswalks running across the paved parking surface. Alternative features such as boardwalks or continuous porches may be substituted as approved by city council. 
(3)  Building frontage sidewalks shall connect to the road frontage sidewalks at a minimum of one location per road frontage and a minimum of two locations per site. These connections shall be sidewalks with a minimum width of six feet and shall include marked crosswalks across driving lanes. Where these connections run parallel to parking spaces, they shall be treated as sidewalks above the curb with a minimum three-foot-wide landscaped area running parallel to the sidewalk, rather than as long crosswalks running across the paved parking surface. 
(f)  In addition to landscape requirements found elsewhere in this chapter, the landscape plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Evidence of parking lot landscape design that feels like cars in a park rather than trees planted in a parking lot 
(2)  Shade trees in landscape islands at the corners of each building 
(3)  A 40 foot wide planted rear buffer is required. Shade trees rising behind buildings mitigate the sense of barrenness that can come with expansive parking lots. The landscape plan should demonstrate that the site will be backed by a wall of greenery growing up behind the buildings. If site disturbance requires the removal of trees in the required rear buffer, it shall be replanted with a mix of large native overstory varieties, including at least 50 percent hardwoods. Provisions for inter-parcel connectivity for both vehicle and pedestrians may extend through the buffer. 
(g)  Bicycle infrastructure. The Campbellton neighborhood is a popular location for cyclists. Development of the HC district should provide the necessary facilities to serve users on bikes. These include bicycle racks at the main entrance to each building, vehicle entrances and exits designed with bicycle safety in mind or, preferable, a short multiuse path that allows bicycles to access the interior of the property without fighting vehicle traffic at the entrances and exits. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-561. - Limitation on locations of HC districts. 
The HC district may be located only where a Historic Crossroad is identified in the city's adopted comprehensive plan and where specifically shown on the future development map. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Sec. 35-562. - Example of architecture. 
Attached as exhibit "1" to this article is a drawing of the type of architecture that is to be incorporated and used in the HC districts. 
( Ord. No. 18-07-182 , § 2, 7-3-2018) 
Exhibit 1 

  
  

ARTICLE VIII. - USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 35-570. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a subordinate use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use, located on the same lot or parcel. 
Agriculture-related activities means agriculture-related activities that preserve the nature and character of agricultural areas including, but not limited to, the accessory use of land for slaughtering or processing of animals, petting zoos, educational tours, dude ranches, picnicking, pay fishing and pick-your-own vegetable and fruit gardens. Concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are not included in this definition. 
Air transportation; airport, private, means industries that provide air transportation of passengers and/or cargo using aircraft, such as airplanes and helicopters. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Amphitheaters, small or natural, means amphitheaters and outdoor performance spaces designed for smaller performances or that are integrated into their natural surroundings with minimal impact. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Amusement center means an establishment primarily engaged in operating amusements (mini-golf, go cart track, billiard parlor and game arcades). See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Amusement theme park means outdoor recreation facilities consisting of amusement rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, water slides or any similar commercial outdoor recreation. Includes associated food service and indoor amusements. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Assisted living facility means a facility having six or more beds and which offers accommodations that range from independent residential housing options to housing options with personal services. A residential use is to be considered an assisted living facility if it is registered with or licensed by the state as an assisted living home. Any dwelling, facility or structure which for any reason is not required to be or fails to be licensed by the state as an assisted living home, but provides housing, food service, and one or more personal services for any person and which also provides beds for six or more persons, who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood, marriage or adoption shall also be considered an assisted living facility. Personal services include, but are not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, and essential activities of daily living such as bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. For the purposes of this chapter, a continuing care retirement community (CCRC) shall be considered an assisted living facility, and a "child caring institution" or "group-care facility" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3 (as amended) with six or more beds shall also be considered an assisted living facility. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Bed and breakfast, large, means a lodging establishment with six to ten bedrooms or a lodging establishment with less than six guestrooms when additional bedrooms or floor area are proposed or have been constructed in the 24 months preceding the application date. Bed and breakfast inns are characterized by a personalized service and inclusion of a full breakfast in the room rate. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Bed and breakfast, small, means a lodging establishment with no more than five. Bed and breakfast inns are characterized by a personalized service and inclusion of a full breakfast in the room rate. A small bed and breakfast does not propose any additional bedrooms or an increase in floor area compared to what currently exists on the property, nor have any additional bedrooms or additional floor area been constructed in the 24 months preceding the application date. Proposals for additional bedrooms or floor area, or new bedrooms or floor area constructed in the 24 months preceding the application date, will qualify the establishment as a large bed and breakfast. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Business means a use involving retailing, wholesaling, warehousing, outside storage, manufacturing or the delivery of services regardless of whether payment is involved. The term "business" does not include uses which are customarily incidental (accessory) to another use. 
Business service centers (including copy shops) means establishments generally known as copy centers or shops primarily engaged in providing photocopying, duplicating, blueprinting, and other document copying services, without also providing printing services (e.g., offset printing, quick printing, digital printing, prepress services) and establishments (except private mail centers) engaged in providing a range of office support services (except printing services), such as document copying services, facsimile services, word processing services, on-site PC rental services, and office product sales. 
Caterers means establishments primarily engaged in providing single event-based food services. These establishments generally have equipment and vehicles to transport meals and snacks to events and/or prepare food at an off-premises site. Banquet halls with catering staff are included. 
Cemeteries, mausoleums, colabariums means establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains and/or cremating the dead. 
Check cashing establishment means an establishment primarily engaged in facilitating credit intermediation (except mortgage and loan brokerage; and financial transactions processing, reserve, and clearinghouse activities) and licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 7-1-700 et seq. 
Clinic means a use where medical examination and treatment is administered to persons, including ambulatory patients, on an outpatient basis, with the facilities and equipment not being the most significant part of the production process. No patient shall be lodged on an overnight basis. 
College, university and professional school means any educational facility that provides training or education beyond the 12th grade, including, but not limited to, trade, business and vocational schools; any institution of higher learning or assemblage of colleges, affording instruction in the arts and sciences and the learned professions, and conferring degrees. Such facilities may also include uses related to energy production, room, board and food services related to the primary educational purpose of the use. 
Compost facility means a processing operation for the treatment of vegetative matter into humus-like material that can be recycled as a soil fertilizer amendment such as trees leaves and plant material. Organic animal waste, food, municipal sludge, solid waste, and other non-farm or non-vegetative type wastes are not included. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Convenience store means establishments known as convenience stores or food marts (except those with fuel pumps) primarily engaged in retailing a limited line of food goods. 
Country inn means a facility, with the owner or innkeepers providing 24-hour-per-day on-site management, where guest rooms are made available for visitors for fewer than 30 consecutive days. A country inn is distinguished from a bed and breakfast in that it may have more than ten rooms and it may provide food service to the general public. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Country market means establishments primarily engaged in the retail sales of food and beverages and other common household items merchandise from fixed point-of-sale locations. Establishments may have special equipment (e.g., freezers, refrigerated display cases, refrigerators) for displaying food and beverage goods. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Data processing services means establishments primarily engaged in providing infrastructure for hosting or data processing services. These establishments may provide specialized hosting activities, such as web hosting, streaming services or application hosting; provide application service provisioning; or may provide general time-share mainframe facilities to clients. Data processing establishments may provide complete processing and specialized reports from data supplied by clients or provide automated data processing and data entry services. 
Day care center, adult; day care center, child, means a use in which shelter, care, and supervision is provided for six or less persons on a regular basis away from their residence for less than 24 hours a day. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Day care facility, adult; day care facility, child, means a use in which shelter, care, and supervision is provided for seven or more persons on a regular basis away from their residence for less than 24 hours a day. A day care facility may provide basic educational instruction. The term "day care facility" shall include nursery school, kindergarten, early learning center, play school, preschool, and group day care home. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Drive-through or drive-in means a facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities are a type of site development that is usually found in conjunction with a quick vehicle servicing use or other retail sales and service use. Examples include, but are not limited to, drive-through windows, menu boards, car wash facilities, and quick lube or quick oil change facilities. 
Dump station means a place where raw sewage may be entered into a sewer system in a safe and responsible way, often used by owners of motorhomes, campervans, recreational vehicles or boats that are equipped with toilet facilities and a sewage holding tank. 
Dwelling means any building or portion thereof that is designed for or used for residential purposes for periods of more than 30 consecutive days. 
Dwelling, accessory, means a dwelling unit contained within an accessory structure or within a principal structure when separated from the principal use and served by a separate entrance. 
Dwelling, duplex, triplex or quadplex, means a structure containing two dwelling units (duplex); three dwelling units (triplex); or four dwelling units (quadplex). 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a structure containing three or more dwelling units not including townhouses. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means one dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. 
Dwelling, single-family zero lot line, means a single-family dwelling unit built to its lot lines or a portion of its lot lines that is also commonly referred to as a townhouse or rowhouse. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms contructed with the cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities designed for and limited to use as living quarters for one family. 
Educational support services means establishments primarily engaged in providing non-instructional services that support educational processes or systems, including, but not limited to, educational consultants, educational testing services, educational guidance counseling services, student exchange programs and educational testing evaluation services. 
Farming, general, means a parcel of land which is used for the raising of animals (including fish) on a commercial basis, such as ranching, dairy farming, piggeries, poultry farming and fish farming; a facility for the business of boarding or renting horses to the public, or areas for the housing and riding of horses; the keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables. Other uses include, but are not limited to, the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; the construction of farm buildings; the plowing, tilling, or preparation of soil at an agricultural facility; the planting, growing, fertilizing, harvesting, or otherwise maintaining of crops; the application of pesticides, herbicides, or other chemicals, compounds, or substances to crops, weeds, or soil in connection with the production of crops, timber, livestock, animals, or poultry; the breeding, hatching, raising, producing, feeding, keeping of livestock, hogs, equines, chickens, turkeys, poultry or other fowl normally raised for food, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits, or similar farm animals for commercial purposes; the production and keeping of honeybees, the production of honeybee products; and the keeping and raising of farm animals and fowl shall be subject to all regulations promulgated by the county health department. Concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are not included in this definition. On open space, the term "general farming" does not include animal feeding operations (AFOs) as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Festivals or events, occasional, outdoor/indoor, means the periodic gathering of large groups of people for cultural performances, exhibitions, competitions, celebrations and similar events. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Fitness and recreational sports centers means establishments primarily engaged in operating fitness and recreational sports facilities featuring exercise and other active physical fitness conditioning or recreational sports activities, such as swimming, skating, or racquet sports. Uses include, but are not limited to, tennis courts, neighborhood recreation centers, basketball courts, ice rink, hockey rink, soccer, field hockey and football fields, baseball and softball fields, gymnasiums, spas, group exercise and fitness centers, yoga, karate and similar facilities. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Food processing and production means establishments primarily engaged in transforming livestock and agricultural products into products for intermediate or final consumption, including establishments that slaughter and prepare meats. The food products manufactured in these establishments are typically sold to wholesalers or retailers for distribution to consumers, but establishments primarily engaged in retailing bakery and candy products made on the premises not for immediate consumption are included. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Forestry and logging means an operation on a tract or parcel of land involving the growing, conserving, and managing of forests and forest lands (includes the term "silviculture"). Forestry operations or practices include the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes. The term "forestry and logging" does not include the cutting of timber associated with approved land development or the processing of timber into finished or semi-finished products or storage of logs other than temporary storage of logs harvested on the site. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Fruit, vegetable and fresh food markets means establishments primarily engaged in retailing fresh, frozen, or cured meats and poultry; fresh, frozen, or preserved fruits and vegetables; or dairy products. Delicatessen-type establishments primarily engaged in retailing fresh meat are included in this industry. 
Funeral homes and funeral services means establishments primarily engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals (i.e., providing facilities for wakes, arranging transportation for the dead, selling caskets and related merchandise). 
Garage means an accessory structure for a residential use, designed or used for storing a vehicle or vehicles. 
Gasoline and fueling station means a use that provides for the sale of motor vehicle fuels and automotive accessories, and may provide minor repair and maintenance services. Such stations shall be limited to four or fewer bays excluding no more than one attached or detached bay for washing cars. The term "gasoline and fueling station" may also incorporate a convenience store. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
General freight trucking, local, means establishments primarily engaged in providing local general freight trucking. General freight establishments handle a wide variety of commodities, generally palletized and transported in a container or van trailer. Local general freight trucking trips are same-day return. 
General medical and surgical hospitals means establishments primarily engaged in providing diagnostic and medical treatment (both surgical and nonsurgical) to inpatients with any of a wide variety of medical conditions. These establishments maintain inpatient beds and provide patients with food services that meet their nutritional requirements. These hospitals have an organized staff of physicians and other medical staff to provide patient care services. These establishments usually provide other services, such as outpatient services, anatomical pathology services, diagnostic X-ray services, clinical laboratory services, operating room services for a variety of procedures, and pharmacy services. 
General warehousing and storage means establishments primarily engaged in operating merchandise warehousing and storage facilities. These establishments generally handle goods in containers, such as boxes, barrels, and/or drums, using equipment, such as forklifts, pallets, and racks, rather than bulk products of any type (regulated in open yard storage). 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Golf course and country club means a use of land for playing the game of golf; which may include a country club and a driving range as an accessory use. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Governmental facility means a building or institution provided by the government to care for a specified need, such as a courthouse or county jail. 
Greenhouse, nursery and floriculture production means any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for sale or transplanting. No more than ten percent of the income from the use shall be derived from the retail sale of related garden supplies such as chemical fertilizer, tools and other similar goods and/or equipment, and the retail sale of plants not grown on the property. 
Home occupation means an accessory business use of a dwelling unit in any zoning district. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Hotel, motel or inn means a building in which lodging and/or boarding is provided for fewer than 30 days. The term "hotel," "motel" or "inn" may include an accessory restaurant and/or meeting and event facilities in conjunction therewith and may also mean tourist court, motor lodge and inn. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Industrial launderers means establishments primarily engaged in supplying, on a rental or contract basis, laundered industrial work uniforms and related work clothing, such as protective apparel (flame and heat resistant) and clean room apparel; dust control items, such as treated mops, rugs, mats, dust tool covers, cloths, and shop or wiping towels. 
Interurban and rural bus or rail transportation means establishments primarily engaged in providing bus or rail passenger transportation over regular routes and on regular schedules, principally outside a single metropolitan area and its adjacent nonurban areas. 
Keeping and raising of farm animals does not include concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Landscaping business means a business whose primary operation is the sale and/or storage of organic and inorganic materials, plants, mulch, pine straw, and other limited related accessory products for the landscape industry and the storage and use of associated landscape vehicles with an approved use permit for landscaping business, plant nursery, or garden center with indoor retail component. 
Libraries or archives means establishments engaged in maintaining collections of documents (e.g., books, journals, newspapers, and music) and facilitating the use of such documents (recorded information regardless of its physical form and characteristics) as are required to meet the informational, research, educational, or recreational needs of their user. These establishments may also acquire, research, store, preserve, and generally make accessible to the public historical documents, photographs, maps, audio material, audiovisual material, and other archival material of historical interest. All or portions of these collections may be accessible electronically. 
Livestock quarters and enclosures does not include concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Manufacturing, heavy, means industries that create industrial products and/or vehicles by applying mechanical force to perform work, including forging, stamping, bending, forming, welding and machining. The term "heavy manufacturing" includes establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing rubber products from natural and synthetic rubber. Establishments manufacturing rubber tubing made from natural and synthetic rubber, regardless of process used, are included in this industry; other motor vehicle electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing and/or building electrical and electronic equipment for motor vehicles and internal combustion engines. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Manufacturing, light, means assembly and manufacturing of consumer products, including printing, but not including motor vehicles, or establishments that transform a basic fiber (natural or synthetic) into a product. 
Medical laboratory means establishments primarily engaged in providing analytic or diagnostic services, including body fluid analysis and diagnostic imaging, generally to the medical profession or to the patient on referral from a health practitioner. 
Mini-warehouse or self-storage unit means a structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls which are leased or rented on an individual basis for the storage of goods. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Mixed use means development with a mix of residential and nonresidential uses. 
Mobile food services means establishments primarily engaged in preparing and serving meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles or non-motorized carts. The establishment is the central location from which the caterer route is serviced, not each vehicle or cart. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "mobile home" includes travel trailers and similar vehicles placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or more. For all other purposes, including insurance purposes under FEMA-sponsored programs, the term "mobile home" does not include travel trailers and similar vehicles. A mobile home is not an industrialized home. 
Motion picture and sound recording industries means establishments primarily involved in the production and distribution of motion pictures and sound recordings. 
Motion picture theaters means establishments primarily engaged in operating motion picture theaters and/or exhibiting motion pictures or videos at film festivals, and so forth. 
Motor vehicle and recreational vehicle sales and rental means establishments primarily engaged in retailing or rental of automobiles and light trucks, such as sport utility vehicles, and passenger and cargo vans, and of vehicles used for leisure time activities and/or as a dwelling unit while traveling. Examples include a camper, a motor home, a travel trailer and a boat, or retailing these vehicles in combination with activities, such as repair services, retailing used cars, and selling replacement parts and accessories. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions means establishments primarily engaged in the preservation and exhibition of objects, sites, and natural wonders of historical, cultural, and/or educational value. 
Nature parks and other similar institutions means establishments primarily engaged in the preservation and exhibition of natural areas or settings. 
Open yard storage means any activity which involves the sale or storage of any externally stored bulk material; the sale or storage, wrecking, dismantling, processing or sorting of waste, discarded or salvaged paper, rags, machinery, equipment or other junk, including automobiles, trucks and similar motor vehicles, including the temporary parking or storage of machinery utilized for heavy construction, earth moving, timber harvesting, tree or building maintenance, and other heavy, working vehicles; where those materials are commonly stored in an open area outside any building; provided, however, that businesses engaged predominantly in the repair or sale of new or used motor vehicles and other machines shall not be included in the term "open yard storage" if those vehicles and machines are in operating condition and ready for sale or, if non-operational, those vehicles or machines are stored in a building; any property with more than ten vehicles shall be considered open yard storage. Accessory office use of buildings on the property is not evidence that a use should not be considered open yard storage. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Outdoor dining means the provision of seating on a portion of the sidewalk or lot outside of a business establishment for the purpose of eating, drinking, reading or otherwise socializing. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Parking and storage of large vehicles means parking or storage of any vehicle in excess of 24 feet in length, eight feet in width or eight feet in height. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Parking deck means a partially or fully enclosed building designed for the parking of vehicles. 
Parking lot means an unenclosed surface area used for the parking of vehicles. 
Pawn shops means establishments primarily engaged in providing non-depository credit (except credit card issuing, sales financing, consumer lending, real estate credit, international trade financing, and secondary market financing). See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Performing arts, spectator sports, and related activities (including amphitheater, stadiums and concert halls) means establishments primarily engaged in the organization and promotion of live presentations involving the performances of actors and actresses, singers, dancers, musical groups and artists, athletes, and other entertainers, including independent (i.e., freelance) entertainers and the establishments that manage their careers. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Personal care home means any dwelling, facility or structure ("facility") required to be licensed by or registered with the state as a personal care home with no more than five beds is a personal care home for the purpose of this chapter. Any facility which for any reason is not required to be licensed by or registered with the state as a personal care home, or fails to be licensed by or registered with the state as a personal care home but which, through its ownership or management, undertakes for a fee or accepts a grant or utilizes its own funding to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two other persons, who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood, marriage or adoption shall also be considered a personal care home for the purpose of this definition. Personal services include, but are not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, and essential activities of daily living such as bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. The term "personal care home" shall apply without regard to whether any fee charged is paid by the individual to whom the services are provided or by another person, the source of the grant, or the funding source for the operational costs and without regard to whether the facility is operated for profit or not for profit. For the purposes of this chapter, a "child caring institution" or "group-care facility" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3 (as amended) shall also be considered a personal care home. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Pet care services means establishments primarily engaged in providing pet care services (except veterinary), such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training pets. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Professional services means establishments primarily engaged in processes that specialize in performing professional, scientific, and technical activities for others, including, but not limited to, medical and dental services, legal advice and representation; real estate sales and rental agencies; financial services (not including banks, check-cashing and/or payday loans), collection agencies, accounting, bookkeeping, and payroll services; architectural, engineering, and specialized design services; computer services; consulting and counseling services; research services; advertising services; photographic services; publishing, print shops, translation and interpretation services; plumbers, exterminators, and other technical services; veterinary services; and other professional, scientific, office service, and technical services. 
Recreation center and club, private, means establishments primarily engaged in the private facilitation or provision of recreational amenities or opportunities. 
Recreation field means an outside area designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities, including, but not limited to, softball, soccer, football, and field hockey, playgrounds, recreation areas, playing fields, and other similar uses or facilities. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Recreational and vacation camp, RV park or campground means a facility which provides space, food and/or lodging facilities for social, educational or recreational purposes. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Recycling center means establishments primarily engaged in collecting, sorting or processing materials to be recycled, including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper, and aluminum materials. Recycling bins shall not be included in this definition. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Rehabilitation center means a facility providing on-site rehabilitative services whether operated for profit or not for profit. Onsite rehabilitative services include counseling services, therapeutic services offered as a part of any organized program for the mental, psychological, and substance abuse recovery. Uses such as halfway houses, drug rehabilitation centers or other facilities for treatment of drug dependency shall be included in this definition. The term "rehabilitation center" shall not apply to occupational or physical rehabilitation of any person, Hospitals or services located on the premises of a hospital or services offered to individuals by one or more licensed medical professionals in a private office setting or personal services offered as part of a permitted home occupation. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Research and development means establishments primarily engaged in conducting original investigation undertaken on a systematic basis to gain new knowledge (research) and/or the application of research findings or other scientific knowledge for the creation of new or significantly improved products or processes (experimental development). 
Restaurants or eateries means establishments located wholly or partially within a building and primarily engaged in the preparation and serving of food to patrons. A cafeteria shall also be considered to be a restaurant. 
Retail, general, means establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale or rental of any merchandise not regulated elsewhere in this document from fixed point-of-sale locations, including, but not limited to, furniture and home furnishings; appliances and electronic products; building materials and garden equipment and supplies; food and beverages; health and personal care goods; clothing and accessories; sporting goods, hobby goods, books, and music; general merchandise; florists; jewelry; paint and wallpaper; office supplies, stationery and gift stores; used merchandise stores; pet and pet supplies and art dealers; etc. This industry also includes establishments primarily engaged in retailing a general line of new and used merchandise on an auction basis (except electronic auctions). 
Roadside stand means a use offering either farm-grown, prepared food products such as fruits, vegetables, canned foods, or prepared packaged meats or dairy products for sale from a vehicle or an open-air structure. The consumption of food on site is prohibited. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Roominghouse or boardinghouse means a residential use other than a hotel or motel in which lodging may be provided to non-household members for periods of 30 days or longer, and which includes the provision of meals. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Schools K-12, large, means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing academic courses and associated course work that comprise a basic preparatory education ranging from kindergarten through 12th grade for 100 or more total students. 
Schools K-12, small, means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing academic courses and associated course work that comprise a basic preparatory education ranging from kindergarten through 12th grade for less than 100 total students. 
Senior housing means a single-family or multifamily development intended for, operated for and designed to accommodate residents 55 years of age and older. Senior housing communities are designed for seniors to live on their own, but with the security and conveniences of community living. Some provide communal dining rooms and planned recreational activities (congregate living or retirement communities), while others provide housing with only minimal amenities or services. 
Services, personal and household, means appliance and home and garden equipment repair and maintenance, barber shops and beauty salons, garden centers; household, home, garden and pool services. 
Sexually oriented businesses means uses and activities regulated by the city licensing provisions and further regulated by this chapter. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Storage tank, bulk, flammable liquids or gasses, means establishments primarily engaged in the storage of flammable liquids or gasses. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Storm shelter means structures providing shelter from dangerous or inclement weather. See division 4 of this article for additional supplemental use provisions. 
Support activities for air transportation (including airports) means establishments primarily engaged in providing specialized services for air transportation, except air traffic control and other airport operations. 
Swimming pool means an above-ground or in-ground structure that is filled with water and used for swimming. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Technical and trade schools means establishments primarily engaged in offering vocational and technical training in any of a variety of technical subjects and trades. 
Temporary structure means structures intended for short-term use. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Temporary uses, commercial retail, means commercial structures of a seasonal or temporary nature, including, but not limited to, food stands, vendors or similar uses, permitted only in those districts allowing similar uses on a permanent basis. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Testing laboratories means establishments primarily engaged in performing physical, chemical, and other analytical testing services, such as acoustics or vibration testing, assaying, biological testing (except medical and veterinary), calibration testing, electrical and electronic testing, geotechnical testing, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, or thermal testing. The testing may occur in a laboratory or on-site. 
Use, accessory, means a subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal use of a lot, and which is located on the same lot as a principal use. 
Use, principal, means the primary or main purpose or function of a lot or structure. The term "principal use" is synonymous with "main" and "primary." 
Uses, nonresidential, means all other uses listed in this article other than those listed as residential uses. 
Uses, residential, means uses listed in this article as residential uses. 
Utility substations, telephone, electric, gas, etc., means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of electric power, natural gas, steam supply, water supply, and sewage removal through a permanent infrastructure of lines, mains, and pipes. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Vacation/temporary rental means a residential use of an individual dwelling unit, not a part of a bed and breakfast (B&B), country inn, motel, or hotel, provided for rent for periods not exceeding 30 days. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Wholesale trade means establishments primarily engaged in wholesaling products, such as motor vehicles, furniture, construction materials, machinery and equipment (including household-type appliances), metals and minerals (except petroleum), sporting goods, toys and hobby goods, recyclable materials, and parts. 
Yard sales means the general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on any property for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," or "rummage" sale. The term "personal property" means items which are owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. See division 4 of this article for supplemental use provisions. 
Zoos or botanical gardens means establishments primarily engaged in the preservation and exhibition of live plant and animal life displays. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.1, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 15-10-146, § 1, 10-6-2015; Ord. No. 16-07-155, § 1, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 17-03-166 , § 1, 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 35-571—35-588. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 35-589. - Uses listed in Table 35-595; change in use. 
The permitted principal uses and special permit uses set forth in Table 35-595 shall be permitted only as listed within each subarea within said table and only in the manner so listed. Any change of use, including a change of a single use within a multiple use structure, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and any condition of zoning. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-590. - Permitted principal uses. 
A building or premises shall be used only for the principal uses indicated with a "P" in the permitted uses table. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(B), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-591. - Multiple uses. 
Multiple uses within a structure or within a business are allowed; each use being regulated according to the associated provisions set forth within this document. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(C), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-592. - Special permits. 
The following uses are permissible only by special permits of the type indicated: 
(1)  Special administrative permits shall be required as indicated with "A" in Table 35-595. 
(2)  Special use permits shall be required as indicated with "U" in Table 35-595. 
(3)  Any use listed with "A/U" shall: 
a.  Require a special administrative permit when occupying 4,000 square feet or less, or when located more than 1,000 feet from the property line of any off-site residence; and 
b.  Require a special use permit when occupying more than 4,000 square feet and located 1,000 feet or less from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(4)  Special administrative permits and special use permits are subject to the applicable procedures and requirements set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(D), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-593. - Supplemental regulations. 
Any use listed with a "yes" in the column headed by the words "supplemental regulations" in Table 35-595 shall: 
(1)  Satisfy the applicable supplemental use standards established in division 4 of this article in addition to all other zoning ordinance requirements. 
(2)  Schedule a pre-application meeting with the director as delineated in section 35-102. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(E), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-594. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses marked with an "X" in the permitted uses table shall be prohibited in the districts identified. All other uses not listed in said table shall be prohibited in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2(F), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-595. - Table 35-595, Permitted Use Table. 
TABLE 35-595. Permitted Use Table 

 
(P-Permitted Uses) (A-Administrative Uses) (U-Use Permit) (A/U-See section 35-592(d)) (X-Prohibited) 
(#-See further HM and PC subdistrict restrictions in article VII, divisions 7 and 8 of this chapter) 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.2, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 16-07-155, § 2, 7-12-2016) 
Secs. 35-596—35-621. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 35-622. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Principal structure. Accessory uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure to which they are accessory. 
(b)  Residential uses. Accessory uses for residential development may generally be considered to include private garages, stables, storehouses, greenhouses, home occupations, children's playhouses, summerhouses, home workshops, accessory dwellings, swimming pools, yard sales, and similar appurtenant uses. See supplemental use provisions in division 4 of this article. 
(c)  Nonresidential uses. Accessory uses for nonresidential development shall include those normally appurtenant to such development, as provided for in other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.3(A), 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-623. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  Buildings containing attached single-family zero lot line dwellings may be considered as one main residential structure. 
(b)  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal structure has commenced. 
(c)  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal structure to which it is accessory. 
(d)  Accessory dwellings. 
(1)  Accessory dwellings shall be limited to a heated floor area no greater than 960 square feet, excluding stairwells and elevators. In no case shall an accessory dwelling contain more floor area than the principal structure. 
(2)  No more than one accessory dwelling shall be allowed on a lot. 
(3)  The site plan submitted with the building permit application shall identify the location of an off-street parking space. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.3(B), 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 17-03-166 , § 3, 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 35-624. - Accessory uses and accessory structures. 
(a)  Accessory uses and accessory structures shall not be permitted within the first layer, as identified in Table 35-357, except that accessory uses and accessory structures in the rural area shall be exempt from this provision when: 
(1)  Located more than 600 feet from a thoroughfare, excluding alleys, lanes, bicycle trails, bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, paths, passages; or 
(2)  Fully screened from view from any thoroughfare by topography. 
(b)  In all zoning districts, accessory uses and accessory structures shall be prohibited in public rights-of-way except for open spaces, sidewalks, landscape strips, curbs, driveways and street furniture. All other accessory uses and accessory structures shall be located in the second or third layer of the property, as designated in Table 35-357. 
(c)  Meeting rooms, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses or accessory structures for hotels and motels and country inns. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.3(C), 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-625—35-651. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 35-652. - Minimum regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter within each zoning district are the minimum regulations that apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. The following regulations also shall apply to each type of use listed, whether such use is authorized as of right or by special permit. When applied to special permits these regulations shall be in addition to all additional criteria and procedures set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-653. - Air transportation; airport, private. 
(a)  For fixed wing aircraft, a 1,500-foot clear zone extending from the end of all runways shall be secured through ownership or easement, but in no case shall the end of a runway be closer than 200 feet from any property line. 
(b)  For both fixed and rotary-wing aircraft, neither the landing area nor any building, structure or navigational aid shall be located within 400 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(c)  Establishments primarily engaged in providing air transportation of passengers or cargo over regular routes and on regular schedules such as air commuter carriers, scheduled air passenger carriers, scheduled air cargo carriers and scheduled helicopter passenger carriers, are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-654. - Amphitheaters, small or natural. 
(a)  Permanent outdoor performance spaces designed for under 100 spectators or performance spaces with less than ten percent impermeable ground cover 
(b)  No structure shall exceed 40 feet in height 
(c)  No amplified outdoor sound system speaker may be located closer than 200 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-655. - Amusement center. 
(a)  An amusement center use shall not occupy more than five acres. 
(b)  Outdoor recreation activities are limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-656. - Amusement theme park. 
Outdoor recreation activities are limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-657. - Assisted living facility. 
(a)  The approval and/or issuance of any special permit by the city for operation of an assisted living facility may precede the issuance of permits or licenses from the state, provided that any special permit granted shall be conditioned on the issuance of the appropriate permits, licenses or registrations required by the state. 
(b)  No such facility shall be located within 2,000 feet of any community service facility as defined in O.C.G.A. § 37-4-2, rehabilitation center, or supportive housing facility. 
(c)  Any assisted living facility must specify the maximum number of beds for which personal services will be made available. 
(d)  All assisted living facilities must provide at least 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or provide that amount required by the state for the licensing of assisted living homes, whichever is greater. 
(e)  No signs shall be permitted other than those permitted by the regulations of the zoning district within which such personal care home is located. 
(f)  Each location shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(g)  Where such use is allowed in any zoning district, and no parking requirements for the use are specified, the parking requirements to be applied will be those governing residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-658. - Bed and breakfast, small; bed and breakfast, large. 
(a)  When in the RL district, the operator of the establishment shall reside on the site. 
(b)  No guest shall reside in a bed and breakfast inn for a period in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
(c)  No restaurant and eatery use shall be permitted. Breakfast only may be served on the premises and only for guests and employees of the bed and breakfast inn. 
(d)  Rooms shall not be equipped with cooking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 16-07-155, § 3, 7-12-2016) 
Sec. 35-659. - Communications towers. 
See division 5 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-660. - Compost facility. 
(a)  Limit hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Compost facilities shall maintain a buffer of not less than 150 feet adjacent to all property lines. When compost facilities handle and process food waste delivered from off-site sources, such facilities shall maintain a buffer of not less than 300 feet adjacent to all property lines. 
(c)  Collection, storage containers, or receptacles shall not be allowed in minimum yards. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-661. - Country inn. 
(a)  A minimum of six and a maximum of 50 guest rooms are permitted. 
(b)  When in the RL district the owner or manager of the country inn shall reside on the site or provide 24-hour-per-day on-site management. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-662. - Country market. 
(a)  Such use may also sell motor vehicle fuels which shall be limited to a maximum of one fueling position for dispensing petroleum-based fuel. 
(b)  Such use shall not provide repair, maintenance services, or other vehicular services. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-663. - Crematory. 
(a)  The crematory shall have no more than one cremation unit per location. 
(b)  The crematory will be owned and operated by a licensed funeral home. The crematory will be used solely by the funeral home for customers having services at the location of the licensed funeral home and operate as an off-site accessory type use to the funeral home and not as a customer-based independent business. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-664. - Day care center, adult; day care center, child. 
(a)  The use shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
(b)  The use must provide at least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child. Such outdoor areas shall be permitted to utilize off-site open space for meeting this requirement when agreements for using such areas are obtained and provided. 
(c)  The use shall be reviewed by the director so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent thoroughfares. 
(d)  The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(e)  When located within a RL district, the use shall be separated by a minimum distance of 3,000 feet from any other such use, as measured between the closest points of the primary structures. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-665. - Day care facility, adult; day care facility, child. 
(a)  The use shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
(b)  Facility shall be for seven or more persons, excluding staff. 
(c)  The use shall be reviewed by the director so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent thoroughfares. 
(d)  The hours of operation shall be limited 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(e)  When located within an RL zoning district, the use shall be separated by a minimum distance of 3,000 feet from any other such use, as measured between the closest points of the primary structures. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-666. - Dry cleaning and laundry services (except coin-operated). 
(a)  Dry cleaning plants using systems which make use of solvents rated at above 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. standard of classification known as class I systems shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Dry cleaning plants which make use of solvents rated at more than five but less than 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. standard of classification, known as class II and III systems, shall not be established in buildings with other occupancy and shall only be established in buildings which shall be setback not less than 20 feet from any side or rear property line and another building. 
(c)  The applicant for such a plant shall certify in writing at the time of application that all the above conditions shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-667. - Dwelling, single-family zero lot line. 
(a)  Adjacent interior lots on the block face shall be developed as single-family zero lot line dwellings. 
(b)  The side yard requirement may be eliminated on either side of each lot. 
(c)  Easement agreements shall be recorded which allow maintenance and access for that side of the dwelling adjacent to the property line. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-668. - Festivals or events, occasional, outdoor/indoor. 
(a)  As applicable, special events are subject to the requirements of other city departments. 
(b)  No more than eight permits shall be granted per year and no permit shall be effective for more than 21 consecutive days or 16 nonconsecutive days in a 30-day period for a single event on the same property. An application for said permit shall be made no less than 14 days prior to the event. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday; and 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday, or as permitted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-669. - Fitness and recreational sports centers. 
(a)  These criteria shall apply to any fitness and recreational sports center within 1,000 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(b)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(c)  The supplemental use provisions for recreation fields shall apply to all outdoor activities associated with fitness and recreation sports centers. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-670. - Food processing and production. 
(a)  When located in the RL district and within 2,000 feet of a thoroughfare (excluding lanes, drives and alleys), individual buildings shall have a maximum building footprint measuring 82 feet by 150 feet. 
(b)  When located in the RL district, a maximum of five parking spaces shall be permitted for such use. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-671. - Forestry and logging. 
(a)  Such activities shall be conducted consistent with "Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry" as established by the state environmental protection division. 
(b)  Forestry and logging activities taking place on property that is adjacent to occupied residential property shall preserve a 50-foot buffer from the property line of any off-site residence. Up to 50 percent thinning may be permitted in the buffer. 
(c)  In HM, VL and TN districts, forestry and logging activities shall maintain a buffer of not less than 70 feet adjacent to any thoroughfare. Up to 50 percent thinning may be permitted in the buffer. 
(d)  Nothing in these standards shall be interpreted to prevent standard silviculture practices that promote healthy forest-keeping practices. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-672. - Fruit, vegetable and fresh food markets. 
When located in the RL district the use shall be accessory to a bona fide farming operation. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-673. - Gasoline and fueling stations. 

(a)  All repair and maintenance activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(b)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(c)  Only minor automotive repair and maintenance is allowed and shall be confined within the principal structure, out of public view. 
(d)  Outside above-ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas (other than single-service sizes), oil, and other flammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any gasoline service station. 
(e)  Overnight accommodations, showers, and overnight customer parking shall be prohibited. 
(f)  The use shall not be combined with any other use or facility so as to create a truck stop. 
(g)  No more than 16 total fueling positions are permissible for each individual use. 
(h)  All fueling positions shall be located to the rear of the structure and be shielded from the adjacent road by the structure (see illustration above), except that a maximum of one fuel pump that dispenses petroleum fuels and its associated canopies and service areas shall be permitted to be located between the building and an adjacent thoroughfare. When more than one such fuel pump is provided, all additional pumps dispensing petroleum-based fuels, and their associated canopies and service areas, shall be located at the rear of the lot, and not between the building and any adjacent thoroughfare, and shall be located so as to limit visibility from any adjacent thoroughfare to the greatest possible degree. Alternative fuels like biodiesel, hydrogen, and electricity, may be provided on additional pumps in front, with a maximum of one fueling position per alternative fuel type permitted in front. 
(i)  The front and rear of the building should be designed to the primary facade standard, complete with fenestration and entryways (no false facades, false windows, or false doors). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-674. - Golf courses and country clubs. 
(a)  Such use shall utilize open drainage features as alternative to pipe work, including open ditches, swales and filtration trenches. 
(b)  Development shall be focused on areas that are already disturbed and retain existing natural and semi-natural areas for conservation and hydrological enhancement. 
(c)  Native vegetation shall be retained in areas not in play and use native species to reinstate disturbed areas external to the golf course. 
(d)  Only native, drought tolerant landscaping vegetation and ground cover plants shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-675. - Greenhouse, nursery, floriculture. 
The total floor area of greenhouses built in the open space of an individual zoning district shall not exceed 100 square feet of greenhouse floor area for each acre of the individual zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-676. - Home occupations. 
(a)  The smaller of 25 percent or 750 square feet of the gross floor area of a dwelling unit may be used for activities devoted to the home occupation. 
(b)  Signs identifying the home occupation shall be limited to one two-square-foot wall sign as defined in the city sign ordinance. 
(c)  There shall be no storage, display or activity associated with the home occupation visible outside the structure. 
(d)  Excluded uses include restaurants and eateries, funeral homes and funeral services, all retail uses identified in Table 35-595 except for live work units or any other occupation found incompatible with the intent of this chapter. 
(e)  A maximum of two vehicles used for taxi or limousine services shall be permitted on site when such use occurs as a home occupation. 
(f)  Resident participants in a home occupation must have the appropriate occupational licensing, including business licenses. 
(g)  No home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive. 
(h)  No more than two nonresident employees, nor more than six people in total including working residents, employees, clients or patrons are allowed on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the home occupation. 
(i)  Vehicles kept on site in association with the home occupation shall be used by residents only. 
(j)  The transporting of goods by truck is prohibited. Incoming vehicles related to the home occupation shall be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
(k)  When home occupations include the use of instruments, machinery or equipment that emit sounds (i.e., musical instruments, sewing machines, saws, drills) that are detectable beyond the unit, noise levels shall be regulated as follows: From 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., the average peak sound pressure level, when measured off the subject property, of noise created by the home occupation shall not exceed the greater of 60 dB(A) or the ambient noise level. During all other hours, the home occupation shall not create noise detectable to normal sensory perception off the subject property. 
(l)  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
(m)  Auto repair, farm equipment repair, or similar operations shall not be visible from a thoroughfare or neighboring properties; all repair activities and storage of vehicles shall be fully enclosed in a structure, with the exception that one vehicle may be stored outside for up to 24 hours upon delivery or awaiting pick-up. All such storage is subject to any vehicle storage regulation herein or elsewhere in this Code. 
(n)  A personal care home is not permitted as a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-677. - Hotels, motels and inns. 
(a)  Each hotel/motel must provide management on duty 24 hours a day. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued for any business operating from any guest room of the facility. 
(c)  Extended stay hotels or motels (those allowing guests to stay in excess of 14 days) shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-678. - Manufacturing, heavy. 
Not included: 
(1)  Blast furnace. 
(2)  Boiler works. 
(3)  Bone distillation. 
(4)  Fat rendering. 
(5)  Incinerator. 
(6)  Manufacturing of: acetylene gas, acid, ammonia, asphalt, bleaching powder, brick, chlorine gas, cement, coal tar, explosives, fertilizer, glue, gypsum board, linoleum, oil, oilcloth, mineral dye, paint, paper, paper pulp, patent leather, petroleum products, plaster of Paris, pottery, shellac, terra cotta, tile, turpentine, varnish, yeast. 
(7)  Manufacturing of hoses and belting; and molded, extruded, and lathe-cut rubber goods for mechanical applications (except rubber tubing). 
(8)  Mineral extraction. 
(9)  Ore reduction. 
(10)  Rolling mill. 
(11)  Slaughter house larger than 10,000 square feet. 
(12)  Smelting. 
(13)  Storage of: explosives, animal hides. 
(14)  Tanning. 
(15)  Tar distillation. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-679. - Mini-warehouses and self-storage units. 
(a)  Mini-warehouses and self-storage units shall be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from the property boundary of any other such use. 
(b)  All doors utilized for securing storage shall only be permitted on facades located adjacent to an alley or private drive thoroughfare. Such doors shall not be visible from any other adjacent thoroughfare type or open space. 
(c)  At least 75 percent of the total on-site storage space shall be contained in individual enclosed stalls containing no more than 500 square feet each and being no more than ten feet high. 
(d)  An on-site manager or resident manager shall be required and shall be responsible for the operation of the facility in conformance with conditions of approval. 
(e)  No sale of merchandise or flea markets shall be conducted on the property. 
(f)  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
(g)  No outdoor speakers or amplification shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-680. - Mobile food services. 
(a)  Mobile food services includes mobile food concession stands, mobile canteens, mobile refreshment stands, mobile food carts and mobile snack stands. 
(b)  Such uses shall be prohibited from operation within thoroughfares, except for areas of thoroughfares designated for on-street parking. 
(c)  Such uses shall be prohibited from operation within sidewalks, except for areas of sidewalks designated as outdoor dining. See outdoor dining supplemental use provision in section 35-684. 
(d)  Such uses shall not be allowed to stay in one location for more than 16 hours without moving. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-681. - Mobile home (temporary). 
The mobile home shall be removed within one month of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-682. - Motor vehicle and recreational vehicle sales and rental. 
(a)  All vehicles shall be parked on an all-weather surface. 
(b)  No more than 50 vehicles may be displayed outside in areas that are visible from a thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-683. - Open yard storage. 
(a)  An additional 40-foot setback and 30-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided interior to existing zoning setbacks adjacent to all thoroughfares, open spaces, and residential uses. A 20-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided adjacent to all other uses. 
(b)  Interior to the landscaped buffer the use shall be surrounded by an opaque wall or fence no less than six feet tall 
(c)  The landscaped buffer shall be planted with evergreen plant material to obscure the wall as much as possible. Dead plant material shall be replaced promptly to maintain the buffer. 
(d)  In no case shall the contents of the open yard storage be visible from property lines of any thoroughfare, residence, or open space. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-684. - Outdoor dining. 
Outdoor dining may encroach into sidewalk areas when the following criteria are being met: 
(1)  Shall provide a minimum unobstructed sidewalk clear walking area of: 
a.  Four feet in width in all HM districts. 
b.  Six feet in width in all VL and TN districts. 
(2)  No permanent structure or ornamentation shall be located within the area where encroachment is permitted and no element shall be attached to the sidewalk in any way; 
(3)  At such time as the outdoor dining use is discontinued, sidewalks shall comply with all requirements of this chapter; and 
(4)  Outdoor dining may be separated from the sidewalk only with movable planters, fencing or similar non-fixed barriers provided they do not exceed a height of 42 inches including any plant material. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-685. - Parking and storage of large vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles may park within a fully enclosed structure that meets all other criteria of the zoning district. 
(b)  Vehicles may park when fully screened and obstructed from view from any thoroughfare or open space. 
(c)  Vehicles may park on the side or to the rear of the primary residential structure on the lot, provided that the lot is three acres or larger, but shall not be closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to vehicles that park or stand in RL zoning districts for less than eight hours while engaged in the loading or unloading of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-686. - Pawn shops. 
(a)  A minimum of 2,000 feet shall separate property with a pawn shop from another property with a separate pawn shop. 
(b)  If the pawn shop involves title pawn then associated vehicles shall be stored at another location which allows for the long-term storage of such vehicles through the open yard storage or parking and storage of large vehicles use categories. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-687. - Performing arts, spectator sports, and related activities (including stadiums, concert halls, and large amphitheaters). 
No amplified outdoor sound system speaker may be located closer than 200 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-688. - Personal care homes. 
(a)  The approval and/or issuance of any special permit for operation of a personal care home by the city shall precede the issuance of permits or licenses from the state; provided, however, that any special permit granted under the terms of this part shall be conditioned on the issuance of the appropriate permits, licenses or registrations required by the state. 
(b)  When personal care homes include halfway houses, drug rehabilitation centers or other facilities for treatment of drug dependency, such facilities shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any personal care home, community service facility as defined in O.C.G.A. § 37-4-2(6), nursing home, rehabilitation center, or supportive housing facility. 
(c)  An application for a personal care home must specify the number of beds for which personal services will be made available. Any increase in the number provided shall require a new application. 
(d)  All personal care homes must provide at least 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the state for the licensing of personal care homes, whichever is greater. 
(e)  No signs shall be permitted other than those permitted by the regulations of the zoning district within which such personal care home is located. 
(f)  Each location shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(g)  Where such use is allowed in any zoning district, and no parking requirements for the use are specified, the parking requirements to be applied will be those governing residential uses but one additional space shall be required for every four beds. 
(h)  In RL districts, no more than four residents, not including owner and owner's family, may reside on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-689. - Pet care services. 
(a)  Buildings housing animals shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. 
(b)  Any animal pens and runs shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-690. - Places of worship. 
(a)  In addition to the accessory uses and structures that are permitted in division 3 of this article for the zoning district in which the place of worship is located, additional accessory uses and structures are permitted that are customarily associated with places of worship and intended primarily for the use of worshipers; such as a chapel, library, administrative offices, religious educational facilities for worshipers, fellowship hall and related kitchen and dining area, ornamental gardens, or outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses except door signs. 
(b)  The following additional uses may be permitted as accessory to the place of worship only upon approval of a special use permit in accordance with section 35-115, and provided that they meet all regulations specific to the proposed use or structure contained in this division: 
(1)  Day care center. 
(2)  Day care facility. 
(3)  Health and social services, including counseling, out-patient clinics, transitional housing, homeless shelter, soup kitchen, and the like. 
(4)  Indoor recreation facilities such as gymnasiums, health and fitness facilities. 
(5)  Kindergarten. 
(6)  Outdoor recreation facilities 10,000 square feet or larger. 
(7)  Private school (K-12). 
(8)  Recreation center and club. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-691. - Recreation fields. 
(a)  Loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited within 200 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(b)  The hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours when said facility is not associated with a school K-12 (private or public) and when within 1,000 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(c)  When located within areas designated as open space, shall be limited to 70,000 square feet per individual use and shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from any other such use located within any other designated open space area. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-692. - Recreational and vacation camps, RV parks and campgrounds. 
(a)  Minimum lot size shall be ten acres. 
(b)  A minimum 100 foot vegetative, visual buffer shall be required around the entire perimeter of the property. 
(c)  Only accessory services and parking related exclusively to the recreational operations shall be allowed. 
(d)  Length of the stay for all but permanent staff shall not exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(e)  No outdoor public address system shall be allowed 
(f)  Sanitary facilities, dump stations or trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-693. - Recycling center. 
(a)  Limit hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Recycling centers shall maintain a buffer of not less than 150 feet adjacent to all property lines. 
(c)  All recyclable materials shall be stored in containers with no stockpiling outside the containers. 
(d)  Collection, storage containers, or receptacles shall not be allowed in minimum yards. Storage shall be screened with a six-foot-high solid wall or fence, including access gates. 
(e)  The processing of recyclable materials must be done within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-694. - Rehabilitation centers. 
(a)  When rehabilitation centers include halfway houses, drug rehabilitation centers or other facilities for treatment of drug dependency, such facilities shall not be located within 2,000 feet of any personal care home, assisted living facility, community service facility as defined in O.C.G.A. § 37-4-2, nursing home, rehabilitation center, or supportive housing facility. 
(b)  No signs other than those permitted by the regulations of the zoning district within which such rehabilitation center is located. 
(c)  A rehabilitation center containing a residential component (with or without personal services), which provides rehabilitative services to nonresidents, shall be required to provide one additional parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area (excluding the personal living space of the residents) in addition to compliance with any parking regulation of the zoning district governing parking for a residential use. 
(d)  Each location shall be required to provide transportation service for its occupants. 
(e)  Any rehabilitation center applying for a special permit relating to the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency shall be required to complete the application, sufficiently in advance of the date that final action is expected on the decision, to ensure compliance with the public hearing and posted notice requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 (as amended). 
(f)  When a zoning proposal relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a rehabilitation center a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the proposed action as regulated in section 35-106(c). 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-695. - Roadside stands. 
(a)  The hours of operation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m. to the later of 8:00 p.m. or sunset. 
(b)  Any activity or structure shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said activity or structure shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(c)  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the roadside produce stand and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
(d)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(e)  No tent, table or other temporary structure shall be located within 100 feet from the property line of any off-site residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-696. - Rooming and boarding houses. 
(a)  No more than six occupants, not including the owner and owner's family, may reside on the premises. 
(b)  Parking, when provided, must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
(c)  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, primary facade setback, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
(d)  If meals are served on the premises, meals may only be served to residents and owner's family members if present. 
(e)  At least 1,000 feet shall separate a rooming and boarding house from another roominghouse and boardinghouse, transitional housing facility or personal care home. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-697. - Sexually oriented business. 
(a)  All sexually oriented businesses shall be prohibited unless properly licensed in accordance with the city's licensing requirements for such businesses. 
(b)  All sexually oriented businesses shall remain in full compliance with its city license and all other state laws applicable thereto. 
(c)  All property lines of such uses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from the property line of any RL district. 
(d)  All sexually oriented businesses shall submit with the application for a building or occupancy permit a certified boundary survey by a licensed surveyor of the site and the property lines of surrounding properties identifying the use of properties at or within all distance requirements imposed by the sexually oriented business licensing provisions and this chapter. 
(e)  Permitted curb cut access shall only be directly from a highway, boulevard or avenue as identified by the city subdivision and land development ordinance. 
(f)  No actual or depicted specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be visible from outside the structure or on signage outside the structure or visible from outside the structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-698. - Shipping containers. 
(a)  Shipping containers may be used for accessory storage. 
(b)  Containers shall be limited to the rear yard. 
(c)  Containers shall be painted a color that blends into the background and screened from view from all property lines with an opaque fence or an evergreen vegetative screen. Application may be made to the planning commission to approve an alternative design that would be at least as effective as a fence or vegetative screen in promoting the vision for the city expressed in the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Any occupation of a shipping container shall require a building permit and shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
(e)  If the skin of the shipping container is significantly altered, use of the container shall require a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-699. - Storage tank, bulk, flammable liquids. 
(a)  No tank or other structure used for storage of flammable or toxic liquids shall be closer than 100 feet from a property line. 
(b)  A fire prevention, evacuation and safety plan must be approved by the city fire department. 
(c)  A spill containment and noise and air pollution abatement plan must be approved by the director. 
(d)  An application fee for such uses shall be established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-700. - Storm shelter. 
If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the minimum setback, buffering and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-701. - Swimming pool. 
(a)  Enclosures. 
(1)  All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by an enclosure. 
(2)  Such enclosure shall be a fence, wall, or building, to prevent access to the pool by unsupervised children and/or animals. 
(3)  The enclosure shall be an effective fence or wall not less than four feet high with self-closing, positive-latching gates provided on the outer side of the pool deck area. Such fence or wall shall be constructed with no gap greater than four inches, and a vertical member spacing of no greater than 1¾ inches. 
(4)  The enclosure entrance shall be locked when the pool is not open for use and all surrounding objects or structures must have a separation of five feet from the enclosure or utilize other design measures to provide an unclimbable space. 
(5)  The enclosure shall be in place prior to pool completion. 
(6)  Materials and construction shall comply with the regulations administered by the county health department. 
(b)  Detached dwellings. Swimming pools shall be allowed in side and rear yards of single-family dwellings in any district. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-702. - Temporary structure. 
(a)  Temporary structures (whether tents, site-built, mobile or manufactured structures) utilized for construction offices, ticket booths, security guard shelters, storage structures in association with construction, emission inspection stations, portable toilets and other similar uses may be permitted. 
(b)  Temporary structures shall be located outside of any required buffers and landscape areas, and shall maintain the principal structures' setback of the district. 
(c)  Temporary structures must be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within five days of completion of the temporary event or activity for which the structure was approved. 
(d)  A permit for a temporary structure shall expire no more than three years from the date of approval at which time the structure shall be removed unless a new permit is obtained within 30 days of the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-703. - Temporary use, commercial retail. 
(a)  The hours of operation shall be from 8:00 a.m. to the later of 8:00 p.m. or sunset, Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Friday through Saturday. 
(b)  Any display or sales activity shall maintain a minimum 20-foot setback from the right-of-way and shall not be located within a required landscape strip or buffer. Said displays shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any internal drive or permitted curb cut. 
(c)  A minimum of six parking spaces shall be provided for the exclusive use of the seasonal business and shall not occupy the minimum required parking spaces for any other use on site. 
(d)  No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 100 feet of a property line of a residence. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-704. - Utility substations (telephone, electric, gas, etc.). 
(a)  All substation structures shall be contained within the boundaries of the subject parcel and meet the minimum development standards of the district. 
(b)  Utility substations measuring more than 35 square feet and greater than five feet in height from finished grade, unless fully enclosed in a building detailed to fit into the streetscape and meeting all frontage and fenestration requirements, shall meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Minimum setback of all utility structures from a residence shall be: 
a.  Electric: 200 feet. 
b.  Gas and telephone: the applicable minimum setback for the district in which located. 
(2)  A minimum ten-foot-wide landscape strip planted to buffer standards shall be required around the perimeter of all utility sites except along lines where buffers are required. 
(3)  Electric substations shall provide a minimum 50-foot-wide replanted or natural buffer adjacent to the property lines of any property used for single-family. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-705. - Vacation/temporary rental. 
(a)  Occupancy shall be limited to no more than two guests per bedroom, 
(b)  The city noise ordinance shall be posted in the unit and included as a part of the rental contract. 
(c)  Each unit shall receive a rental license, and shall be inspected by the city annually. 
(d)  A special event permit shall be required for all organized events held on the rental property or for any group larger than ten guests. 
(e)  One on-site parking space shall be provided for every two bedrooms. Off-site parking spaces within a quarter mile that are available to the use of the rental unit may be used to fulfill this requirement. The parking arrangements for such use shall be diagrammed and filed with the rental license application. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-706. - Water towers. 
(a)  Water towers shall be constructed of natural materials or metal. 
(b)  Except for safety purposes, water tower lighting shall be allowed only during maintenance periods. Each outdoor light that is not required for safety shall be fully shielded. The safety lighting shall use a type of shielding to provide lighting downward. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-707. - Yard sales. 
(a)  Only three yard sales are permitted per property per year. 
(b)  A yard sale shall not exceed four consecutive days. 
(c)  Vehicular parking shall not be permitted in locations otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other city regulations. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.4, 5-5-2015) 
Secs. 35-708—35-727. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES 

Sec. 35-728. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide requirements for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications support structures and antennas; to encourage the location of support structures in nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of support structures within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city; to encourage the joint use of new and existing support structure sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications support structures and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of support structures and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.1, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-729. - Applicability. 
(a)  Location. No support structure or antenna shall be located in the city except as set forth in this section. Except as set forth in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, the provisions, requirements and limitations of this section shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave or radio transmission support structure or antenna installed within the city. If any provisions in other sections of this chapter conflict with this section, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Height limitations. Height limitations applicable to buildings and structures set forth elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply to support structures and antennas which comply with this section. 
(c)  Governmental exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this section, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the governing authority's properties, facilities or structures. 
(d)  Amateur radio receive-only antennas. This section shall not apply to any support structure, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna; provided, however, only one such support structure or antenna per residence shall be exempt from this section. Amateur radio receive-only antennas shall be located in the second or third layer unless fully screened, or more than 600 feet from the right of way. 
(e)  Television/radio antennas/satellite dishes. This section shall not apply to any support structure, or the installation of any antenna that is 75 feet or less in height and is used for the purpose of receiving satellite, television or radio signals in the operator's residence; provided, however, only one such support structure or antenna per residence shall be exempt from this section. Receive-only antennas/satellite dishes shall be located in the second or third layer unless fully screened, or more than 600 feet from the right of way. 
(f)  Pre-existing support structures and antennas. Any support structure or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this section. Any such support structures or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "pre-existing support structures" or "pre-existing antennas"; provided, however, that the placement of antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a vested right for the continued use of the structures should the nonconforming use cease. If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing support structure or alternative support structure after adoption of this section, then the requirements of section 35-730(e) (except subsection (e)(6)), (g) and (h) shall be met as part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-730. - General provisions. 
(a)  Principal or accessory use. A support structure and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structures. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or support structure. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a support structure or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or support structure may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Support structures that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(b)  Five-year plan and inventory of existing sites. To facilitate the co-location of antennas and future land use planning, each applicant seeking to locate a new support structure, alternative support structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the director an inventory of its existing support structures or alternative support structures, existing support structures or alternative structures to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed support structures or alternative Structures to be constructed in the next five years following the date of the application. 
(1)  The inventory shall include all such structures owned or leased by the applicant that are within the jurisdiction of the city and, within a neighboring jurisdiction which currently is capable of providing coverage or capacity within the city, and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, support structure type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each support structure or alternative structure, and other pertinent information as may be required by the director. 
(2)  If the applicant does not know specific future support structure and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(3)  The director may share the location of existing telecommunication facility sites with other applicants seeking to locate support structures or antennas within the jurisdiction of the city; provided, however that the director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. The location of any proposed telecommunication facility sites will be protected as privileged information if the applicant so requests and it is considered as such under the applicable laws and legal authority. 
(c)  Co-location; design requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all support structures shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
(1)  For support structures up to 90 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology; 
(2)  For support structures 90 feet to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
(3)  For support structures 150 feet to 200 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
(4)  No support structure shall exceed 200 feet in height. 
(d)  Co-location; availability of suitable existing structures. No new support structure shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that no existing support structure or existing alternative support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The applicant shall submit an inventory of all support structures or alternative support structures located within one-half mile of the proposed location. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. All required evidence must be submitted with the application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing support structure or other structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  No existing support structures or suitable alternative support structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(2)  Existing support structures or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
(3)  Existing structures or support structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment; 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing support structures, or the antenna on the existing support structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(5)  The cost or contractual provisions required by the support structure owner to share an existing support structure or alternative support structure or to adapt an existing support structure or alternative support structure for sharing exceed the cost of new support structure development. Specific cost information must be submitted if this justification is to be relied upon; and 
(6)  The applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing support structures unsuitable, other than economic reasons. If the requirement of co-location will cause additional expense to the applicant, all such costs must be specifically shown. 
(e)  Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall govern the design and construction of all support structures, and the installation of all antennas governed by this section. 
(1)  Support structures and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At all support structure sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the support structure facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(3)  For antennas installed on a structure other than a support structure, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. Antennas designed to appear as trees are preferred. 
(4)  Support structures shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If the lighting is required, the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(5)  No signage or other identifying markings or signs shall be permitted upon any support structure or alternative support structure within the city. 
(6)  To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
(7)  Access to the support structure site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing thoroughfares shall be used. Where no thoroughfare exists, access shall follow the existing contours of the land. 
(8)  Such other additional requirements as the director shall reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
(f)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all support structures: 
(1)  Support structures shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the support structure from its base to any public right-of-way or occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the support structure. 
(2)  Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
(3)  In all zoning districts, support structures shall not be located closer than 2,000 feet from any existing support structure. 
(4)  In the event an applicant clearly demonstrates that, given the structural failure characteristics of an alternative structure design, the required setbacks are excessive and unduly burdensome, the applicant may request the setbacks be reduced. In determining whether setbacks shall be reduced, consideration shall be given to both the danger from structure collapse and falling debris, such as ice, from a structure. 
(g)  Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. All support structures and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternatives and shall comply with the fence requirements in section 35-400. 
(h)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all support structures. 
(1)  Where adequate vegetation is not present, support structure facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the support structure compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
(2)  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
(3)  Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the director to ensure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(i)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a thoroughfare, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the thoroughfare, utilizing existing access to the property on which such facility is to be located, where possible. 
(j)  Airport review. If, upon receipt of an application for the erection of any support structure or alternative support structure governed by this section, the director deems that the proposed structure may interfere with or affect the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall be submitted by the director to the respective airport authority for review and recommendation. 
(k)  Federal requirements. All support structures must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate support structures and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the permittee or the lessee of the support structure and antenna governed by this section shall bring such support structure and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards or regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such support structure and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment of the support structure and constitute grounds for the removal of the support structure or antenna at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. 
(l)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of support structures, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a support structure or alternative support structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for support structures that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the director concludes that a support structure fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the support structure, said party shall have 15 days to bring the support structure into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such support structure into compliance within 15 days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the support structure and constitute grounds for removal of the support structure. Prior to the removal of any support structure, the director may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard support structures, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. 
(m)  Change of ownership notification. Upon the transfer of ownership of an interest in any support structure, alternative support structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the support structure permittee shall notify the director of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-731. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting an application for a permit for any telecommunication facility, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application meeting with the director as required in section 35-102. Applicants shall also review the city inventory of potentially available sites for co-location. 
(b)  General application requirement. Application for a permit for any telecommunication facility shall be made to the director by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. The director is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. Except for a co-location information submittal, the following information shall be submitted at the time the application is submitted. The application will not be considered complete and will not be accepted unless accompanied by all required information at the time of submittal. 
(1)  A survey, sealed by a surveyor registered in the state, showing the location of all lot lines, leased areas, easements, access points, structures, screening and landscaping existing on site. 
(2)  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city. 
(3)  Scaled elevations showing the impact of the proposed support structure or antenna. 
(4)  Landscaped plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 35-730(h). 
(5)  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures, zoning districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
(6)  Information and drawings showing that the proposed facility and support structure satisfy the aesthetic requirements of section 35-730(e). 
(7)  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(8)  Report from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the state, or other appropriate qualified industry expert, documenting the following: 
a.  Support structure or antenna type, height, and design; 
b.  Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
c.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
d.  Evidence of structural integrity of the support structure or alternative support structure; 
e.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
f.  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(9)  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility, including name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address. Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network, such as whether such antenna or support structure is needed for coverage or capacity. 
(10)  If the proposed site is in a RL zoning district, applicant must describe why an alternate zoning district was not proposed by identifying: 
a.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure such an alternate site and why such efforts were unsuccessful; 
b.  Why such an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; and 
c.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
(11)  The director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The director shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
(12)  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power line easements impacting the proposed support structure site. 
(13)  The original signature of the applicant. The applicant must provide a signed, notarized statement of all owners of the subject property authorizing the filing of the application, and where applicable, the signed and notarized affidavit of the owners of the subject property authorizing an applicant or agent to act on their behalf in the filing of the application. The application also shall contain the mailing address and phone number of any applicant or agent who is authorized to represent the owner of the subject property. Where applicable, the applicant shall also provide a copy of any lease agreements with the owner of the subject property. 
(14)  The applicants proposed five-year plan, the inventory of existing support and alternative support structures, and other information required by section 35-730(b). 
(15)  Evidence demonstrating specifically that no existing support or alternative support structure can accommodate the proposed antenna, under section 35-730(d). 
(16)  If the proposed antenna height exceeds the limitations of section 35-734, the applicant must describe why an antenna complying with that height standard is not feasible by showing: 
a.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure an alternate site and why such efforts were unsuccessful; 
b.  Why an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; 
c.  How and why the proposed height is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area; and 
d.  How and why the necessary service cannot be provided with more antennas at a height complying with section 35-734. 
(17)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(c)  Support structure co-location information submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna which will add no more than ten feet to the height of the support structure and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a support structure for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only. This information must be submitted at the time the application is submitted. The application will not be considered complete and will not be accepted unless accompanied by all required information at the time of submittal: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the support structure and a copy of any lease agreements with said owner. 
(3)  The support structure's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the support structure. 
(5)  The remaining structural capacity of the support structure. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.4, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-732. - Administrative approvals. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The director may approve by special administrative permit the uses set forth in subsection (d) of this section. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this subsection, in section 35-114 for special administrative permits and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  As part of any special administrative permit approval related to this section, the director may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
(3)  Any decision by the director that results in the denial of a request to place, construct, or modify wireless telecommunications facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this section for uses allowed by administrative approval and provided in section 35-114 for special administrative permits, the director shall consider the applicable factors set forth in section 35-733(f) in acting upon an application for administrative approval. 
(b)  Application contents; fee. All applications for special administrative permits shall be submitted to the director. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 35-731. A special administrative permit application shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 35-731. An application fee shall be charged by the director in an amount stated in section 35-736. 
(c)  Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a support structure or placement of an antenna shall be required to co-locate upon an existing support structure or alternative support structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing support structure suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative support structure is available as set forth in section 35-730(d). 
(d)  Uses allowed by special administrative permit. The following uses may be approved through special administrative permit by the director after conducting an administrative review, provided all other criteria of this section are met. 
(1)  Co-location of any antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing support or alternative support structure. 
(2)  Replacing an existing support structure with a new support structure designed to accommodate three or more users so long as the new support structure does not exceed the height of the original structure or the height limitations of this section or the setback requirements of this section. After the replacement support structure is built, only one support structure shall remain on such site. 
(e)  Appeal of the director's determination. If a special administrative permit application for a support structure as an administratively permitted use is determined by the director to not meet all applicable criteria of this section or any other related regulation of this chapter, the applicant may appeal the determination to the city council pursuant to section 35-117. 
(f)  Report of approved permits. A report of all administrative permits approved as set forth in this section shall be presented to the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.5, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-733. - Special use permit required. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  If the proposed support structure or antenna is not eligible for a special administrative permit, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a support structure, alternative support structure or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this section, in section 35-113 for special use permits and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the city council may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to mitigate from the proposed support structure or antenna upon surrounding properties. 
(b)  Application contents; fee. All applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the director. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 35-731. An application for a special use permit shall not be accepted for processing without all the information required in section 35-731. 
(c)  Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a support structure or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing support structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing support structure suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative support structure is available as set forth in section 35-730(d). 
(d)  Independent expert review. The city shall engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant for a special use permit if the application seeks a new support structure over 100 feet in height. The city may engage such an expert if the application seeks a new support structure less than 100 feet, or seeks a co-location. The expert shall render an opinion regarding any concerns about the proposal, including, but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Following the review of an independent expert, the city shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. 
(e)  Public hearing. Before taking action upon the proposed special use permit, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing on the matter consistent with the requirements of section 35-106. 
(f)  Considerations in approval or denial of special use permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The city council shall submit a written decision to the city clerk, and mail a copy to the applicant, within one week of the date of decision. In addition to the review standards provided for special use permits in section 35-115, the following factors shall further be taken into consideration in acting upon a special use permit application under the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The height and setbacks of the proposed support structure or antenna; 
(2)  The proximity of the support structure or antenna to residential structures and properties; 
(3)  The surrounding topography; 
(4)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(5)  The design of the support structure or antenna, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, such as a monopole or alternative support structure; 
(6)  The proposed ingress and egress; 
(7)  The availability of suitable existing support structures or other structures for antenna co-location; and whether the applicant has demonstrated adequately, pursuant to section 35-730(d), that no co-location is possible; 
(8)  The impact of the proposed support structure or antenna upon scenic views, special districts or properties, and visual quality of the surrounding area; 
(9)  The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties; 
(10)  The impact of the proposed support structure or antenna on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity; 
(12)  Whether the applicant has complied with, and satisfactorily demonstrated compliance with, all requirements of this division; 
(13)  Whether the applicant has satisfied the aesthetic requirements of section 35-730(e); and 
(14)  If the applicant has previously filed a five-year plan pursuant to section 35-730(b), whether the proposed facility complies with that plan, and if not, whether the applicant has valid reasons for deviating from its plan. 
(g)  Requirements for issuance of special use permit. The special use permit may be issued by the city only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
(1)  A proper and complete application filed in accordance with the requirements of section 35-115; 
(2)  The application is in compliance with the conditions for the proposed special use permit required by this division, and is in compliance with all requirements of section 35-730; 
(3)  The applicant complies with the conditions proposed by the city for the purpose of reducing the harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with neighboring uses; 
(4)  The city determines, based upon a review of the requirements and factors set forth in this division, that the benefits and need for the proposed special use permit are greater than any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and 
(5)  All fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.6, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-734. - Support structures and antennas by location. 
(a)  Placement of support structures and antennas. No permit shall be granted for any site in a rural area, unless the evidence establishes that it is not possible to locate said support structure or antenna in another area and close significant gaps or otherwise provide personal wireless communication service mandated by the terms of the applicant's federal telecommunication license. No support structure or antenna shall be permitted within 2,000 feet of any residentially used property unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. For the purposes of this section, the term "residentially used property" means the property on which the residence is located and not more than three acres of land, determined as if the residence was situated in the center of said tract. All other requirements of this division shall apply and must be satisfied prior to a permit being granted. 
(b)  Height standards. If the evidence establishes the necessity for placing a support structure or antenna within the areas listed in subsection (a) of this section, the height of such support structure or antenna shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  Within the RL district: the maximum height for a support structure, including antennas, shall be 75 feet. 
(2)  Within HM, VL, or TN district: The maximum height for a support structure, including antennas, shall be 90 feet. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.7, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 15-10-146, § 3, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 35-735. - Removal of abandoned support structures and antennas. 
(a)  Notice of abandoned antenna and structures. The owner or lessee of a support structure or antenna shall promptly notify the director of its intent to abandon or the abandonment of any support structure or antenna. 
(b)  Removal of abandoned antennas and support structures. Any support structure or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or support structure shall remove the structure within 90 days of such abandonment. If said support structure or antenna is not removed within said 90 days, the city may take such action as may be deemed necessary to remove, or cause to be removed, such antenna or support structure at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the support structure. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.8, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 35-736. - Application and permit fees. 
(a)  Administrative approvals. For purposes of this division, an application for a special administrative permit shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Construction of new support structure up to 100 feet. An application for construction of a new support structure up to a height of 100 feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said support structure or antenna, shall be $1,000.00. 
(c)  Construction of new support structure greater than 100 feet. An application for construction of a new support structure greater than 100 feet in height, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said support structure or antenna, shall be $3,000.00. 
(d)  Special use permit for location of antenna on support structure or alternative support structure. An application for location of an antenna on an existing support structure or alternative support structure, the addition of said antenna adding more than ten feet to the height of the existing support structure or structure, shall be $500.00. 
(e)  All other applications. Unless specifically provided above, the fee for any other application under this division shall be $500.00. 
(f)  Building permit fees. In addition to the application fees set forth herein, the applicable construction and utility inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application for the permit shall apply. 
(g)  Review costs. All direct costs incurred by the city for an independent expert review conducted according to section 35-733(d) shall be charged to the applicant. Such charges shall be paid by the applicant before the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 15-05-137, § 4.5.9, 5-5-2015) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the Codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 