PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL CITY OF LINCOLNTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Personnel Manual to quickly and accurately determine what policies, resolutions, and ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Policies, resolutions, and ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Manual and are considered "Included." Policies, resolutions, and ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Manual and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Personnel Manual will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Manual's historical evolution. 

 
CITY OF LINCOLNTON, GEORGIA - PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Labor and employment generally, O.C.G.A. § 34-7-1 et seq.; workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; municipal training, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

Sec. 1-1. - Scope; general policy. 
(a)  This manual is a compilation of the city's personnel management system. The city personnel management system is a system of employment that recognizes that city employees should be selected and advanced according to their knowledge, skills and abilities. 
(b)  Because of the increasingly complex legal nature of the employment relationship, the city deems that it is in the best interest of the city and its employees to have written personnel policies. It is important for city employees to know the city's objectives and expectations. It is also essential that all members of management understand the role of these policies in meeting those objectives. 
(c)  Any policy, however, is only as good as its implementation, and the key to the implementation of this policy is the supervisor who is responsible for, and in direct contact with, each group of employees. Supervisors must translate these ideas and principles into action, for the successful development of a productive, legal, and harmonious working environment for city employees. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.100; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 1-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The personnel policies have been adopted by the mayor and council to establish uniform benefits and procedures, ensure equal employment opportunity, and comply with office of revenue sharing regulations. 
(b)  In a broader sense, the mayor and council want to ensure the high morale for the employees of the city and high productivity for the people of the city. To accomplish those goals, the mayor and council feel that fair and equitable treatment of all applicants and employees is a necessity. 
(c)  Although all jobs are not identical, and, therefore, all conditions of employment will not be identical, many personnel practices can be the same in all departments. Among those practices are the methods of accruing and requesting annual and sick leave, the method of administering disciplinary action and the methods of administering employee complaints. By including those provisions in the policies, the mayor and council hope to provide equal benefits to each employee and to assure good personnel practices. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.200; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 1-3. - Objectives. 
The objectives of establishing the following employment practices are to comply with the accepted principles of good personnel practices and to enhance the employment conditions in the city with the belief that fair and equitable employment practices lead to greater job satisfaction and productivity. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.100; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-18) 
Sec. 1-4. - Employment privileges do not create employee rights; amendments. 
(a)  These personnel policies have been voluntarily established by the mayor and council. The policies are intended to standardize the personnel practices in the various departments where standardization is possible and to extend certain privileges to the employees of the different departments. 
(b)  In establishing these practices and privileges, the mayor and council are not relinquishing their constitutional authority as appointing authorities, nor are they creating a property interest for employees that leads to the expectancy of continued employment at any time, in any position. The privileges are considered good personnel practices and are consistent with the above-stated goals. 
(c)  This manual is intended as a guide for employees and is not necessarily the final word in all cases. Individual circumstances may dictate individual attention, and the policies and procedures set out in this manual may be modified or omitted in particular situations as authorized by the city council. 
(d)  This manual is not a contract of employment, and the provisions hereof are subject to amendment at any time by the city council. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.300; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 1-5. - Coverage. 
(a)  These policies apply to the covered employees in the departments of participating officials in the city. Participating officials will accept the policies as desirable standard procedures by signature. 
(b)  Federal law recognizes that neither elected officials nor members of their personal staffs should be covered by rules or regulations that imply specific employment practices. Therefore, the elected officials will determine which positions in their departments are policy making or personal staff and will exclude those positions. 
(c)  This practice of identifying covered employees is a voluntary attempt to extend the personnel practices to as many classes of employees as possible. By including certain classes, the officials are not redefining the relationships between themselves and their employees as defined by state law. They are merely extending the personnel practices to as many employees as possible. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.400; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-12) 
Sec. 1-6. - Administration. 
In general, the department heads are responsible for administering these policies in their respective departments. The mayor will give administrative support to the departments in administering the policies and will become directly involved only when requested to or when budget and funding are concerned. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.500; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-13) 
Sec. 1-7. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this manual, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adverse action. The term "adverse action" means an action taken that results in a disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary salary reduction, disciplinary demotion or disciplinary dismissal. 
Adverse effect. The term "adverse effect" means the result of an action or decision that is not an adverse action but which deprives the employee of income or the opportunity to earn more income. 
Appointing authority. The term "appointing authority" means the person who has, among other authorities, the authority to appoint and discharge all covered employees. The mayor, or his designee, is the appointing authority. 
City. The term "city" or "this city" means the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
City officials. The term "city officials" means the mayor and council of the city and their delegees. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia, 
Council, city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Covered employees. The term "covered employees" means employees who work for city officials but who are not members of their personal staffs nor policy makers. 
Days. When the term "days" is used as a method of counting, it means calendar days unless stated otherwise. 
Department. The term "department" refers to the different departments under the city. 
Designee. The term "designee" means the person or persons to whom the city officials delegate certain authorities for the administration of their offices. 
Disabled. The term "disabled" refers to any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, who has a record of such an impairment, or who is regarded as having such an impairment. 
Employee. The term "employee" means any person who works for salary, wages, or other remuneration provided by the city. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" shall mean the City Council of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Immediate family. Included in the term "immediate family" are the employee's spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters. The definition "immediate family" is extended to any other person who resides in the employee's household and who is recognized by law as a dependent of the employee. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Regular employee. The term "regular employee" means full-time covered employee who has completed all employment requirements including the working test. The term is used solely to identify covered employees who have completed their working test. 
Shall; may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Should. The term "should" denotes a condition that is desirable but not mandatory. 
Time. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Unlawful discrimination. The term "unlawful discrimination" means employment practices that are prohibited by state and federal laws, and which include discrimination because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, mental or physical handicap and political affiliation. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Working test. The term "working test" means a period of time, usually six months, during which a new employee or an employee who has been transferred or promoted to a higher position is being tested on job capability and performance. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Pers. Man. § 2; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-14) 
Sec. 1-8. - Authority for and effect of departmental affirmative action plans. 
If voluntary affirmative action is considered desirable by any department, the individual appointing authorities will develop and administer their own affirmative action plan. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.102; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-18) 
Chapter 2 - APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 2-1. - Types. 
The city council recognizes two types of appointments that apply to both original appointments and to promotions. They are noncompetitive and competitive appointments. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.400; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-19) 
Sec. 2-2. - Noncompetitive appointments. 
It will be the policy of the city to promote from within whenever possible. Noncompetitive promotions shall be consistent with fair employment practices. This type of appointment applies to temporary and part-time employees who are not covered by these policies. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.401; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-19) 
Sec. 2-3. - Competitive appointments. 
Competitive appointments are the normal practices of the departments. When a vacancy occurs, a recruitment plan will be developed and implemented by the appointing authority. An applicant must be considered qualified for the job to be employed, and in general, the best qualified applicant will be employed. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.402; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-19) 
Chapter 3 - HIRING AND TERMINATIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - At will employment policy. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council, city employees are employed at the will of the city and are subject to termination at any time, for any reason, with or without cause or notice. 
(b)  No city official is authorized to modify the provisions of this section for any employee or to enter into any agreement, oral or written, that changes the at-will relationship. Supervisory and management personnel are not to make any representations to employees or applicants concerning the terms or conditions of employment with the city that are not consistent with city policies. 
(c)  No statements made in pre-hire interviews or discussions, or in recruiting materials of any kind, alter the at-will nature of employment or imply that discharge will occur only for cause. 
(d)  Nothing in this manual creates an express or implied contract of employment for a definite period, or an express or implied contract concerning any terms or conditions of employment. Similarly, city policies and practices with respect to any matter are not to be considered as creating any contractual obligation on the city's part or as stating in any way that termination will occur only for "just cause." 
(e)  Statements of specific grounds for termination set forth in this manual or in any other city documents are examples only, not all-inclusive lists, and are not intended to restrict the city's right to terminate at will. 
Sec. 3-2. - Posting and announcement of job openings. 
Except when affirmative action needs or employment development needs take priority, and as long as these needs do not deprive protected groups of an equal opportunity, job opening announcements will be posted in conspicuous public places and announced in appropriate public communications media. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.200; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-18) 
Sec. 3-3. - Additional personal information required for certain positions. 
In employment areas such as public safety and finance where the public has a compelling interest in the security of property and life, applicants for employment, promotion, and transfer will be asked to supply personal information that would not be needed in other employment areas. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.300; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-18) 
Sec. 3-4. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Each new employee is on probation for six months from the date of their employment with the city, unless otherwise shortened by action of the city council. During the probationary period, the employee earns, but is ineligible for PTO accrual or any other leave. 
(b)  Employment may be terminated at any time, and for any reason, during the probationary period and recourse to grievance procedures is denied. 
(c)  At the end of the probationary period, the employee's work is evaluated and a decision made regarding retention. 
(Resolution of 04-04-2017(1), 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 3-5. - Employee licensing and certifications. 
The city may require that job applicants and employees, as a condition of employment or continued employment, obtain reasonable licensing and certifications required or desirable for the betterment of the employee's performance of job duties. Failure to obtain such licensing or certifications is grounds for termination. 
Chapter 4 - TRANSFERS, PROMOTIONS AND DEMOTIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Working test. 
As a final test of employability, the first six months of employment in positions of original appointment, promotion or transfer to a class that has different qualifications shall be a working test. Upon completion of the working test, the employee will be considered as being capable of performing satisfactorily in that position. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.500; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-20) 
Sec. 4-2. - Job mobility. 
It is possible for employees to voluntarily move upward, downward or laterally in the organization. It is also possible for the employee to be involuntarily moved in all three directions. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.600; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-21) 
Sec. 4-3. - Transfer. 
If a position is open at equivalent pay, an employee may request transfer to that position. If the knowledge, skill and abilities required for that job are not the same as for the present job, the employee will be tested and interviewed for the new position, and will be on working test for the new job if transferred. An appointing authority may transfer an employee to any position, at any pay, if the employee is qualified to do the work and if his salary is not changed. A temporary transfer to a higher position may be made for up to 90 days without giving a salary increase. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.601; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-222) 
Sec. 4-4. - Promotion. 
It will be the policy of the city to promote from within when possible. A promotion is a change from a lower to a higher job classification. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.602; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-23) 
Sec. 4-5. - Demotion. 
Employees may request that they be demoted to open positions at lower pay if they are qualified for the position. The employee's salary will be reduced appropriately. Disciplinary demotions will be administered according chapter 12 of this manual. All disciplinary demotions will result in a salary reduction. 
(Pers. Man. § 4, Par. 4.603; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-24) 
Chapter 5 - WORK HOURS AND ATTENDANCE 

Sec. 5-1. - Regular minimum hours; variances. 
The minimum work week for covered employees will be 40 hours. Because of the differences in job requirements in the different departments, the required work period will vary from job to job and department to department. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.100; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-15) 
Sec. 5-2. - Overtime hours. 
(a)  Nonexempt employees. Nonexempt employees whose work period is one week will be paid at the rate of 1½ the normal rate for all hours worked over 40 per week. 
(b)  Exempt employees. Exempt employees will receive their normal salary for any work period. 
(c)  Public safety employees. Public safety departments will establish work periods and overtime policies separately as a part of the departmental operating policies. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.101; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-15) 
Sec. 5-3. - Absences and tardiness. 
(a)  All employees are expected to notify their supervisor of the reasons for their absence or tardiness before the time they are scheduled to report for duty, except in the case of an emergency. No employee will be penalized for tardiness or absence from work due to emergencies or causes beyond their personal control. The supervisor determines whether the employee will be penalized in each situation. 
(b)  Being late or absent repeatedly is grounds for dismissal. If an employee is absent for three days without giving notice, such absence will be considered a resignation without notice and he will be removed from the payroll. 
Chapter 6 - HOLIDAYS 

Sec. 6-1. - Official holidays enumerated. 
(a)  The following are the official holidays that will be observed: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Dr. Martin Luther King Day; 
(3)  National Memorial Day; 
(4)  Independence Day; 
(5)  Labor Day; 
(6)  Veterans Day; 
(7)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(8)  Day after Thanksgiving; 
(9)  Christmas Eve or Day after Christmas Day; and 
(10)  Christmas Day. 
(b)  Other days may be declared as holidays by resolution of the mayor and council at their discretion. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.200; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-16; Policy of 10-02-2018(1), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-2. - Day of observance of holidays occurring on Saturday or Sunday. 
If a holiday falls on a Saturday, it will generally be observed on the preceding Friday. If the holiday falls on a Sunday, it will generally be observed on the following Monday. The exception to the above is Christmas Eve. If December 24 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.202; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-16) 
Sec. 6-3. - Holidays occurring during leave periods. 
Holidays which occur during annual or sick leave shall not be charged against annual or sick leave. Full-time employees shall be paid for holidays based on the number of hours they normally work each day. Temporary employees will not be paid for holidays not worked. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.201; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-16) 
Sec. 6-4. - Compensatory time for employees required to work during holidays. 
Employees may be required to work during the above holidays. Those employees who are required to work should receive the equivalent consecutive days off at another time determined by the employee and the department head. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.202; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-16) 
Chapter 7 - LEAVE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Policy of 10-04-2016(1), adopted October 4, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 7, §§ 7-1, 7-2, 7-10—7-13, 7-20—7-23, 7-30—7-33, 7-40, 7-50—7-52, and enacted a new Ch. 7 as set out herein. The former Ch. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Pers. Man. § 5, Parts 5.100, 5.200, 5.300—5.304, 5.400—5.406, 5.500—5.502, 5.600—5.800; Comp. Ords. 1998, §§ 2-4-25—2-4-30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Types. 
The officials of the city recognize three types of leave that are available to employees. They are paid time off (PTO), military leave, and leave of absence. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-2. - Method of calculating PTO. 
(a)  Upon completion of an employee's probationary period, PTO will accrue as follows: 
(1)  Start of full employment to end of calendar year—At a rate of two days per three full calendar months remaining in the year, with the exception that any employee whose full employment begins after October 1 shall be entitled to two days of PTO to be used within the remainder of the year, any remaining balance of which shall not be compensated for pursuant to section 7-12. 
(2)  First full calendar year of full employment—Eight days of PTO, with the exception that any employee who, prior to the beginning of the first day of the first full calendar year has been a full employee more than 180 days shall be entitled to an additional two days of PTO. 
(b)  Thereafter, for additional years of full employment, PTO will accrue as of each successive January 1 as follows: 
(1)  One year to three years—12 days of PTO annually. 
(2)  Three years to five years—18 days of PTO annually. 
(3)  Five years to ten years—22 days of PTO annually. 
(4)  After ten years—28 days of PTO annually. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016; Resolution of 04-04-2017(1), 4-4-2017) 
Secs. 7-3—7-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAID TIME OFF 

Sec. 7-10. - Defined. 
PTO is leave that is granted to be used for illness, vacation, personal business and other personal activities. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-11. - Method of calculating accrual. 
All covered employees shall become eligible for PTO accrual upon the end of the probationary period of employment, if any. PTO shall accrue in accordance with section 7-2 of these policies. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016; Resolution of 04-04-2017(1), 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 7-12 - Maximum days that may be accrued. 
As of January 1 of each calendar year, an employee's PTO will accrue in accordance with this personnel policy. At the end of the calendar year, any accrued PTO not utilized by the employee, up to ten days, shall be paid to the employee. Any PTO in excess of ten days not utilized by the employee at the end of the calendar year will be forfeited. No PTO will carry beyond the end of the calendar year. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-13. - Request for leave and time for reporting absence. 
Any PTO utilized by the employee for vacation must be requested and approved by the mayor before the leave is taken. 
Any PTO utilized by the employee for illness should be reported by the employee prior to the scheduled work time if possible, and if not, the employee should see that the absence is reported within one hour of the scheduled time for the employee to begin work. PTO for illness requires the approval of the mayor. 
Employees have the option of making use of one-half day PTO, in lieu of taking a full day, upon request to and approval by the Mayor. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016; Resolution of 02-07-2017(1), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 7-14. - Funeral leave. 
Death of an immediate family member (mother, father, brother, sister or child) of an employee will entitle the employee to an additional three days of PTO per occurrence. PTO for other deaths in an employee's family will be granted by mayor and/or at the discretion of the personal committee. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-15. - Court leave. 
An employee who has been called to serve as a member of a jury or who has attendance has been compelled pursuant to a subpoena shall be granted PTO for such days required to be served in addition to the yearly PTO accrued. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - SICK LEAVE 

Secs. 7-20—7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MILITARY LEAVE 

Sec. 7-30. - Scope and purpose. 
Georgia law requires that paid leave be granted to member of the Reserve and National Guard under certain conditions, and leave of absence is required under other conditions. These polices are in compliance with the law. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-31. - Duration of leave for military duty. 
In compliance with O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, any employee ordered to military duty shall be placed on military leave with pay for a period of time not exceeding a total of 18 days in one calendar year and not exceeding 18 days in any one continuous period of absence. This is in addition to regular PTO. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-32. - Duration of leave during declared state of emergency. 
According to O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, in the event the governor declares an emergency and orders an employee to state active duty as a member of the National Guard, the employee shall receive pay for a period not exceeding 30 days in any one calendar year and not exceeding 30 days in any one continuous period of active duty service. This is in addition to regular PTO. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-33. - Leave of absence for military training; effect on employee benefits. 
(a)  According to O.C.G.A § 38-2-279, any voluntary member of the Reserve and National Guard shall be entitled to absent himself and shall be deemed to have a military leave of absence as an employee while in attendance at any service school conducted by the armed forces of the United States for a period up to six months during any four-year period. 
(b)  A military leave of absence prevents a break in service, but no PTO or time toward retirement shall accrue or be paid during leave of absence. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Secs. 7-34—7-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LEAVE OF ABSENCE 

Sec. 7-50. - Generally. 
If an employee exhausts all PTO due to illness or reasons beyond their control, the employee may be placed on leave of absence, depending on the duration of the absence and need to fill the position. A leave of absence may be granted in cases of temporary disability, extended illness and possible other emergency situations. A leave of absence prevents a break in service, but no PTO or time toward retirement shall accrue during a leave of absence. Only a majority vote from mayor and council can grant additional PTO to an employee on leave of absence caused by temporary disability, extended illness or emergency situations. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-51. - Physician's statement required. 
If granted, a doctor's statement will be requested to determine the length of leave necessary. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 7-52. - Maternity leave of absence. 
Maternity leave, defined: Maternity leave includes, but shall not be limited to, absence for: pregnancy related medical appointments, bed rest, labor and delivery, and post-partum recovery. 
In addition to regular PTO, an employee shall be allowed six (4) weeks of additional PTO as maternity leave, recognized holidays included. Furthermore, an employee who chooses to take advantage of the additional PTO as maternity leave as defined and stated above shall be entitled to an additional two weeks unpaid maternity leave at the option of the employee. 
(Policy of 10-04-2016(1), 10-4-2016; Resolution of 01-10-2017(1), 1-10-2017) 
Chapter 8 - SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Drug-Free Public Workplace Act, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Workplace Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-24-1 et seq.; drug-free workplace programs, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-410 et seq.; procedures and forms for certification of drug-free workplace programs, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-421; elements of drug-free workplace programs, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-413. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to outline the city's standards for a drug- and alcohol-free workplace and to ensure a safe work environment, promote the greatest efficiency of its employees, protect the city from liability, and protect the city's assets and employees from damage caused by an employee under the influence of alcohol or drugs. An employee who uses illegal drugs or alcohol on the job creates a risk of serious danger to the safety, security and health of not only himself, but innocent co-workers and members of the public. 
(b)  This chapter is further intended to provide notice to employees of the city's drug-free workplace policies, as required by O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414 et seq., including the situations in which the employee may be required to submit to testing and the disciplinary actions the employee may be subject to for violations of the policies provided in this chapter and for refusal to submit to testing as required by this article. 
State Law reference— Notice of testing, policy statement, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414. 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Confirmation test, confirmed test or confirmed substance abuse test means a second analytical procedure used to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite in a specimen conducted in the method required by state law. 
Drug means amphetamines, cannabinoids, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), methadone, methaqualene, opiates, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, propoxyphene, or a metabolite of any such substances. An employer may test an individual for any or all of these. 
Employee means any person who works for salary, wages, or other remuneration provided by the city. 
Initial test means a sensitive, rapid, and reliable procedure to identify negative and presumptive positive specimens conducted in the manner required by state law. 
Job applicant means a person who has applied for a position with the city and has been offered employment conditioned upon successfully passing a substance abuse test and may have begun work pending the results of the substance abuse test. 
Prescription medication means a drug or medication lawfully prescribed by a physician for an individual and taken in accordance with such prescription. 
Reasonable suspicion testing means substance abuse testing based on a belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in violation of the city's policy drawn from specific objective and articulable facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in light of experience. 
Rehabilitation program or assistance program means an established program capable of providing expert identification, assessment, and resolution of employee drug or alcohol abuse in a confidential and timely service by persons licensed or appropriately certified as health professionals to provide drug or alcohol rehabilitative services. 
Substance means drugs or alcohol. 
Substance abuse test, drug test or test means any chemical, biological, or physical instrumental analysis administered for the purpose of determining the presence or absence of a drug or its metabolites or of alcohol. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-411. 
Sec. 8-3. - Duty of city officials and employees. 
The city and all its officials will take reasonable steps to ensure that drug abuse does not occur at any of its facilities. It is a condition of employment that all employees subject to this policy abide by its terms. 
Sec. 8-4. - Policy against hiring persons using illegal substances. 
It is the policy of the city not to hire individuals who use any illegal drug or controlled substance without a medically acceptable prescription. 
Sec. 8-5. - Prohibited acts generally. 
All city employees on a full-time, part-time and temporary basis are prohibited from: 
(1)  Reporting for work or performing work under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or illegal drug; 
(2)  Possessing or consuming any intoxicating drug, including alcohol, during work hours; 
(3)  Manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, selling, possessing or using alcohol, a controlled substance, or illegal drug on city property, in city vehicles, or while off the premises and engaged in the regular employment of the city; 
(4)  Using city property or one's position to facilitate the manufacture, distribution, sale, dispensation, possession or the use of a controlled substance or illegal drug. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.305; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 8-6. - Searches in the workplace. 
(a)  Where appropriate, the department head or his designee may invoke the right, to the extent not prohibited by law, to require the employee to submit immediately to a search of his desk, cabinet, locker, or other items owned by the city on the premises which he has or has had access to. 
(b)  Refusal to agree to a lawful search or inspection requested by the department head or his designee is considered insubordination and grounds for disciplinary action as deemed by the department head to be appropriate, including termination. 
Sec. 8-7. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The use of alcoholic beverages by employees on city property is prohibited. Furthermore, an employee is not permitted to report to work while under the influence of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  An employee will be considered to be "under the influence" when consumption of any alcoholic beverage has impaired or is likely to impair the employee's job performance in the judgment of the department head or his designee. 
(c)  Employees who violate this policy may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
Sec. 8-8. - Illegal drugs and controlled substances. 
(a)  The possession or use of illegal drugs or the improper use of other drugs during working hours or on city property is prohibited. An employee is not permitted to report to work while under the influence of any drug that could adversely affect performance. 
(b)  Any employee who engages in illegal or improper drug use which could adversely affect job performance or which could jeopardize the safety of himself, other employees, members of the public or city property will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
(c)  Any employee who is under a physician's care and who is taking prescribed medication or controlled substances that could affect performance should report this treatment to his supervisor. This information is important to the city in ensuring that safety and efficiency is maintained. 
Sec. 8-9. - Notice of certain drug convictions required. 
(a)  An employee who is convicted or pleads guilty under a criminal drug statute for a violation must notify his department head no later than five days after such a conviction or plea. 
(b)  A criminal drug statute is any federal, state or local law that makes unlawful the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, use or possession of any controlled substance. 
(c)  Failure to notify the city of such conviction or plea will be grounds for disciplinary action, including termination. 
Sec. 8-10. - Prescription drugs. 
(a)  Any employee who is using a prescribed drug for any medical reason or other condition which might impair the ability to perform his job or might create a safety hazard should discuss the matter with his immediate supervisor. The supervisor will determine whether the individual can safely work while taking the medication. 
(b)  If it is determined that the individual is unable to perform his duties without impairment caused by the medication, and such determination by the supervisor is endorsed by the department head, the employee will be directed not to work until the medication that is being taken is no longer present or use of medication causing impairment is discontinued. Such employee will be placed on sick leave, to the extent of eligibility. 
Sec. 8-11. - Grounds for immediate dismissal. 
An employee who engages at work in the illegal manufacture, distribution, dispensation, sale or use of a controlled substance or illegal drug; or who is found on city property to be in possession of such a substance or drug; or who is convicted under a criminal drug statute for a violation occurring on the city's premises or in a city vehicle, or off premises while on city business, may be terminated by his department head immediately. 
Sec. 8-12. - Other disciplinary actions. 
Appropriate disciplinary action for other violations of any aspect of this policy will be based upon circumstances. The nature and severity of the discipline will be determined at the sole discretion of the department head and may include an oral or written warning, suspension, probation or termination. Disciplinary actions under this chapter shall be subject to the grievance and appeal procedures provided in this manual. 
Sec. 8-13. - Report to law enforcement agencies. 
Violation of any aspect of this policy may result in notification to law enforcement agencies. 
Sec. 8-14. - Confidentiality of information. 
Information regarding the use of drugs by an individual or employee will be maintained in strictest confidence by the city to the extent practicable. Such information on an employee may be disclosed to governmental or law enforcement authorities, supervisory or managerial personnel, consultants or physicians who have a legitimate need to know in connection with the disposition of disciplinary matters in the administration of this policy or as required by law. 
State Law reference— Confidentiality requirements, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-420. 
Sec. 8-15. - Policy statement to be included in job announcements. 
Each job announcement for positions available from time to time with the city shall include a statement providing that the position includes the obligation to submit to substance abuse testing as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Provision required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414(c). 
Sec. 8-16. - Policy statement to be posted and copies to be available for inspection. 
Notice of the city's substance abuse testing policy as provided in this chapter shall be posted in appropriate and conspicuous locations on city premises, and copies of this chapter shall be made available in the office of the city clerk for inspection by employees and job applicants. 
State Law reference— Provision required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414(c). 
Sec. 8-17. - Employee acknowledgment. 
(a)  Each employee subject to this policy will be furnished a copy of this manual and required to sign a statement acknowledging that he has received, reviewed and understands the provisions of this manual, specifically including this chapter regarding the city's drug-free workplace policy. 
(b)  Employees are hereby notified of the existence of and encouraged to review the provisions of the federal Drug-free workplace Act, 41 U.S.C. § 701 et seq., the Drug-Free Public Workplace Act, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; the Drug-Free Workplace Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-24-1 et seq.; drug-free workplace programs, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-410 et seq. Copies of these statutory provisions are available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Notice of certain federal and state acts required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414(a)(7). 
Secs. 8-18—8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Standards and procedures for testing, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415. 

Sec. 8-20. - Required for job applicants. 
All job applicants for positions with the city shall be required to submit to substance abuse testing. 
Sec. 8-21. - Required for employees. 
Employees may be required to submit to substance abuse testing: 
(1)  At any time that city officials, including department heads, have reasonable suspicion or cause to believe that the employee is in violation of this chapter; 
(2)  In the event of the employee's involvement in or contribution to any work-related injury or accident; or 
(3)  As part of any routine fitness-for-duty examination, to take a test to determine the presence of drugs, narcotics, or alcohol, unless law prohibits such tests. 
State Law reference— Standards and procedures for testing, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415. 
Sec. 8-22. - Grounds for reasonable suspicion testing. 
A determination by the city that testing is required for reasonable suspicion of violation of this policy may be based among other things, on facts and inferences including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Observable phenomena while at work, such as direct observation of substance abuse or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being impaired due to substance abuse; 
(2)  Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance; 
(3)  A report of substance abuse provided by a reliable and credible source; 
(4)  Evidence that an individual has tampered with any substance abuse test during his employment with the city or a previous employer; 
(5)  Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an accident or injury work or while engaged in work-related activities, resulting in personal injury or property damage; or 
(6)  Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the city's premises or while operating the city's vehicles, machinery, or equipment. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-411. 
Sec. 8-23. - Grounds for reasonable suspicion testing to be disclosed in writing. 
If testing is conducted based on reasonable suspicion, the city shall promptly detail in writing the circumstances which formed the basis of the determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing. A copy of this documentation shall be given to the employee upon request and the original documentation shall be kept confidential pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 34-9-420 and retained by the city for at least one year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(d)(12). 
Sec. 8-24. - Effect of positive test. 
Testing positive for illegal drugs or alcohol is a violation of the policy and will result in disciplinary action up to and including immediate termination. 
Sec. 8-25. - Testing after participation in rehabilitation or other assistance program. 
If an employee in the course of employment enters rehabilitation or other assistance programs as the result of a positive test, the employee will be required to submit to a substance abuse test as a follow-up to such program. However, if an employee voluntarily entered the program, follow-up testing is not required. If follow-up testing is conducted, the frequency of such testing shall be at least once a year for a two-year period after completion of the program and advance notice of the testing date shall not be given to the employee. 
Sec. 8-26. - Testing standards. 
All testing conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be in conformity with state law, state rules and generally accepted testing standards. 
State Law reference— Standards and procedures for testing, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415. 
Sec. 8-27. - Confirmative of positive test results required. 
An initial test having a positive result must be confirmed by a confirmation test conducted in a laboratory in accordance with state law and rule. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(g). 
Sec. 8-28. - Confirmative of negative test results permitted. 
If an initial drug test is negative, the city may in its sole discretion seek a confirmation test in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(f). 
Sec. 8-29. - Notice of positive confirmed test to be provided to employee or applicant. 
The city shall notify the employee or applicant of positive confirmed test results within five working days after receipt of the test results. The notice shall include the consequences of the positive result and options available to the employee or applicant to contest or explain the results as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(d)(6). 
Sec. 8-30. - Copy of test to be furnished to employee or applicant on request. 
A copy of the substance abuse test result shall be furnished by the city to the employee or job applicant upon request. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(d)(7). 
Sec. 8-31. - Test costs. 
The city shall pay the cost of all drug tests, initial and confirmation, which the city requires of employees. The employee or job applicant shall pay the cost of any additional tests not required by the city. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-415(d)(10) and (11). 
Sec. 8-32. - Effect of refusal to submit to testing. 
Employees who refuse to submit to substance abuse testing when requested to do so by the city shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including immediate termination. Job applicants who refuse to submit to substance abuse testing if requested to do so by the city will not be hired. 
State Law reference— Provision required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414(a)(4). 
Sec. 8-33. - Contesting or explaining positive test results. 
Employees or job applicants who receive a positive confirmed substance abuse test result may contest or explain the result to the employer within five working days after written notification of the positive test result. 
State Law reference— Provision required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-414(a)(6). 
Secs. 8-34—8-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS AND EMPLOYEE EDUCATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Employee assistance programs generally, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-417. 

Sec. 8-40. - Employee assistance programs as alternative to discipline. 
(a)  If an employee is in violation of this policy under circumstances which do not result in immediate termination, and is found to be dependent upon or to have used or been under the influence of such a substance or drug, the department head or the city council will provide the employee with information about local sources where the employee may receive drug or alcohol counseling, rehabilitation, including referral to any city-provided employee assistance programs. 
(b)  Depending upon the circumstances, the department head may, at his option, but subject to council approval, suspend disciplinary action in such a case and allow the employee to participate in drug or alcohol counseling, rehabilitation or an employee assistance program for the purpose of enabling the employee to overcome any dependency and cease prohibited conduct. 
(c)  An employee who elects such participation may have a disciplinary action suspended while counseling, rehabilitation or assistance programs are being utilized. An employee who declines to participate in or fails to complete drug or alcohol action, or an employee who, having successfully participated in such a program, again engages in conduct prohibited by this policy, shall remain subject to strict disciplinary action, which may include termination without further recourse to a treatment program. 
(d)  The city maintains in the office of the city clerk a resource file of providers of assistance, including drug and alcohol abuse programs, mental health providers, and other persons, entities, or organizations available to assist employees with personal or behavioral problems. The city also posts in the office of the city clerk a current listing of providers of employee assistance in the area. 
State Law reference— Resource file required, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-416. 
Sec. 8-41. - Employee substance abuse education seminars. 
The city shall provide substance abuse education seminars as required by O.C.G.A. § 34-9-17. Employee attendance is mandatory. In addition, the city shall provide supervisor training as required by O.C.G.A. § 34-9-418. Participation by supervisory personnel in such training is mandatory. 
State Law reference— Employee education programs, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-17; supervisor training, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-418. 
Chapter 9 - HARASSMENT 

Sec. 9-1. - Policy generally. 
Harassing behavior will be regarded as a violation of city policy and will be dealt with accordingly. 
Sec. 9-2. - Harassment defined. 
Harassment constitutes an unwelcomed conduct, whether verbal, physical, visual or an interaction via social media and/or electronic communication of any sort, that is based upon an individual's sex, race, religion, national origin, age, disability, or other classification protected by law. The city will not tolerate harassing conduct that effects pay or benefits, that interferes with an individual's work performance, or that creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
Sec. 9-3. - Sexual harassment defined. 
The definition of sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. These actions constitute sexual harassment when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is made a term or condition of an individual's employment, whether explicitly or implicitly; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis of employment decisions affecting the individual; or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
Sec. 9-4. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any individual either experiencing or observing a suspected incident of harassment shall report the incident to their supervisor, or to anyone else in management. 
(b)  Complaints concerning sexual harassment must be sent in writing to the department head. 
Sec. 9-5. - Review and final decision of complaints. 
The city's policy is to investigate all such complaints. If the city determines that the complaint is valid, the city will administer disciplinary and other corrective action as appropriate. 
Sec. 9-6. - Retaliatory action prohibited. 
The city shall not tolerate retaliatory action against an employee who files a claim of harassment or sexual harassment. Any employee, supervisor or department head who takes adverse action against an employee who has filed a claim or has participated in the investigation of a claim shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
Chapter 10 - ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES 

Sec. 10-1. - Chapter purpose and scope. 
The provisions of this chapter are to ensure the implementation of necessary action to aid in the event of work-related accidents or injuries and to prevent future occurrences. 
Sec. 10-2. - Reporting. 
All accidents, injuries or property damage occurring on city property or involving city-related or job-related activities must be reported immediately to the employee's supervisor, department head or other designated city official, before any other city personnel are contacted. Failure to report accidents, injuries or property damage by the employee to the employee's immediate supervisor is grounds for termination. 
Sec. 10-3. - Drug testing. 
Any employee involved in an accident or injury occurring on city property or involving city-related or job-related activities shall submit immediately for drug and alcohol testing if requested to do so by city officials or if the injury requires medical attention. 
Chapter 11 - MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 11-1. - Purpose and intent. 
Because public employees are in positions created for the public and funded by the public, the public has the right to expect that the incumbents in positions will not abuse the trust placed in them by the public. The employees of the city are expected to observe and honor the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city and the various jurisdictions within the city. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.300; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-2. - Political activities. 
The city officials expect the covered employees to avoid public political activities. Neither their positions nor city time should be used for campaigning for any bipartisan candidate. The employees may express their political opinions privately, and the officials encourage the employees to vote for the candidates of their choice. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.301; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-3. - Outside employment. 
Supervisory city officials will administer the outside employment policy for their respective department. Any city employee must receive permission from his appointing authority before accepting outside employment. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.301; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-4. - Gifts and gratuities. 
No covered employee should accept significant gifts or gratuities from anyone who might except to receive return favors from the city. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.303; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-5. - Conflicts of interest; nepotism policy. 
No relatives should be employed in positions where their familial interests could conflict with the interests of the city. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.304; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-6. - Garnishments. 
Employee indebtedness is a personal concern of the employee, but multiple garnishments of an employee's salary create administrative difficulties that may lead to disciplinary action. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.306; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Sec. 11-7. - Misuse of equipment and supplies. 
Employees are entrusted with the use of public equipment and supplies. The abuse or misuse of city equipment and supplies can lead to appropriate disciplinary actions. 
(Pers. Man. § 3, Par. 3.307; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-17) 
Chapter 12 - DISCIPLINE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Chapter purpose and scope. 
This chapter on disciplinary actions is included to establish uniform procedures that should be followed under most circumstances. Included in the policy is a list of general categories for taking disciplinary actions. The list is intended to communicate to both employees and managers some general conditions under which disciplinary action may be appropriate. That list is neither mutually exclusive nor collectively exhaustive. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.311; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 12-2. - Progressive discipline. 
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. The city officials advocate progressive discipline when applicable. The action taken will depend on the degree and the circumstances of the violation. An employee who fails to adequately perform assigned duties or who violates established policies will be disciplined. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.100; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-31) 
Sec. 12-3. - Conduct warranting disciplinary action. 
Conduct warranting disciplinary action includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Chronic tardiness or absenteeism; 
(2)  Negligence in performing assigned duties; 
(3)  Inefficiency in performing assigned duties; 
(4)  Inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties; 
(5)  Insubordination; 
(6)  Misconduct; 
(7)  Commission of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  Conduct reflecting discredit on the city or department; 
(9)  Failure to report to work without justifiable cause; and 
(10)  Political activity that is prohibited by these policies; 
(11)  Commission of a crime involving theft, dishonesty or operating any sort of vehicle while impaired. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.200; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-32) 
Sec. 12-4. - Categories of discipline. 
The officials recognize six degrees of disciplinary action. The six disciplinary actions fall into two general categories: reprimands and adverse actions. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.300; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Secs. 12-5—12-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REPRIMANDS 

Sec. 12-10. - Degrees of reprimands. 
A reprimand is a formal means of communicating to the employee a warning that a problem exists and that it must be corrected. There are two degrees of formality: the oral reprimand and the written reprimand. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.400; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-11. - Oral reprimands. 
In an oral reprimand, the manager should verbally and privately explain to the employee that he is being reprimanded and describe the problem and what must be done to correct the problem. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.401; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-12. - Written reprimands. 
In the written reprimand, the employee should receive a written statement describing the problem and what must be done to correct the problem. The reprimand should also contain a statement describing the probable consequences of not correcting the problem. If the employee is at work, the written statement should be given to the employee during a private interview. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.402; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Secs. 12-13—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVERSE ACTIONS 

Sec. 12-20. - Degrees. 
Adverse actions make up the remaining four degrees of disciplinary action. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.500; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-21. - Suspension without pay. 
An employee may be suspended without pay for a violation of accepted policies governing performance and conduct. The suspension without pay should not exceed 30 days. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.501; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-22. - Disciplinary salary reduction. 
An employee's salary may be reduced from one pay to a lower pay for disciplinary purposes. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.502; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-23. - Disciplinary demotion. 
An employee may be demoted from one position to a lower position for disciplinary reasons, if a lower position is open and if the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A disciplinary demotion shall include a decrease in salary. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.503; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-24. - Dismissal. 
An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary reasons when all other alternatives have failed to solve the problem, or when it is necessary to remove the employee from the workplace immediately and/or permanently. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.504; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-33) 
Sec. 12-25. - Suspension with pay. 
An employee may be suspended with pay for a violation of accepted policies governing performance and conduct. 
Secs. 12-26—12-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 12-30. - Notice of proposed adverse action. 
The appointing authority or his designee may give the employee a written notification of any proposed adverse action. The written notification may be given at any time prior to and up until the proposed adverse action is to take place. The notification should contain the following: 
(1)  The effective date of the action; 
(2)  The specific charges or reasons for the action; 
(3)  A statement informing the employee that he may respond to a named official within ten days of the notice of proposed adverse action; and 
(4)  A warning that failure to respond to the named official will result in a waiver of all further appeals. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.601; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-34) 
Sec. 12-31. - Employee response. 
The employee may respond in person or in writing to the named official within ten days of receiving the notice of proposed adverse action. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.602; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-34) 
Sec. 12-32. - Extension of time for employee response. 
If the employee responds to the named official, the official may postpone the deadline for the final notice by a specific number of days to conduct further investigation, with written consent from the employee. If the deadline for the final notice is postponed, the effective date of the final action shall be postponed by as many days. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.604; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-34) 
Sec. 12-33. - Notice of final determination. 
The appointing authority, after considering the employee's response, should give the employee a written notification of the decision on the action to be taken within two days of the effective date of the action. The notification should contain a statement informing the employee of his privilege of appealing the action. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.603; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-34) 
Sec. 12-34. - Emergency action. 
The appointing authority or the designee may take immediate disciplinary action against an employee under emergency situations. Examples of emergency situations shall include but not be limited to the following: when crimes are committed; when an employee may be injurious to himself, fellow workers or the general public; or when an employee may damage public property. 
(Pers. Man. § 6, Par. 6.700; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-35) 
Chapter 13 - GRIEVANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Scope generally. 
Closely associated with the disciplinary provisions are the grievance and appeal procedures. These procedures have been established to provide a communications process between the employees and management under normal circumstances and to meet the due process requirements of the office of revenue sharing. The process provides for a series of hearings that progress form an early informal hearing to one in which each party may be represented by an attorney. The object of the process is to solve problems as soon as possible, while giving the employees an opportunity to express their views thoroughly. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.312; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 13-2. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of the employee grievance procedure is to provide an orderly process for hearing the grievable claims of both regular and working test employees. The object of the process is to reach a fair and equitable decision in a timely manner. The employee and manager should make an effort to resolve any grievance informally before initiating a formal procedure. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.200; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-36) 
Sec. 13-3. - Grievance defined. 
A grievance is a claim initiated by an employee alleging that his employment or productivity has been adversely affected by unfair treatment, unsafe or unhealthy working conditions, capricious application of city or departmental policies and procedures, or alleged unlawful discrimination. This definition of the term "grievance" applies to all covered employees and to all qualified handicapped employees. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.202; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-37) 
Sec. 13-4. - Nongrievable issues. 
The following issues are not grievable: 
(1)  Issues which are pending or have been concluded by other administrative or judicial procedures; 
(2)  Work assignments which do not result in a demotion or salary reduction; 
(3)  Budget allocations and expenditures, and organizational structure, including the persons or number of persons assigned to particular jobs or units; 
(4)  The selection of an individual by the appointing authority to fill a position through appointment, promotion or transfer except when the employee can show that he has been adversely affected because of unlawful discrimination; 
(5)  Disciplinary actions other than reprimands; 
(6)  Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the appointing authority; 
(7)  Internal security practices established by the appointing authority; and 
(8)  Decisions, policies, practices, resolutions or ordinances made or passed by the governing authority or the appointing authority which are not job or work related and which do not contradict these policies. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.300; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-42) 
Secs. 13-5—13-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 13-10. - Due process requirements. 
(a)  In establishing the grievance and appeal procedures for all employees, the mayor and council have met the procedural due process requirements of the office of revenue sharing for handicapped employees. 
(b)  Realizing that handicapped employees may experience problems not perceived by the nonhandicapped, the mayor and council sincerely encourage the handicapped to express their views and problems to management, either informally or formally. 
(c)  Because we all have different perspectives, the mayor and council feel that the same hearing procedures should be extended to all employees. Although the procedural due process requirements for handicapped and non-handicapped employees may be identical, the due process incorporated in these policies in no way implies that an expectation of continued employment exists for any employee, handicapped or nonhandicapped. 
(Pers. Man. § 1, Par. 1.312; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 13-11. - Filing written grievance. 
An employee may file a written grievance with his immediate supervisor within 15 days after the occurrence of the event being grieved, or within 15 days after becoming aware of the event. The grievance statement must be submitted to the supervisor in writing, and it should state the specific claim and the specific relief desired. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.203; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-38) 
Sec. 13-12. - Required steps. 
The employee grievance procedure must provide for a minimum of two steps for covered and handicapped employees who do not report directly to their department heads. Normally, the immediate supervisor will hear the grievance in the first step and the department head will hear the grievance in the second step. For covered department heads and other employees, the sole grievance hearing will be conducted by the mayor and council. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.204; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-39) 
Sec. 13-13. - Scheduling and notification. 
(a)  First hearing. If the claim is determined to be grievable, the first hearing should be held within 20 days after the grievance is filed. The first hearing officer should notify the grievant of his decision in writing within 15 days of the hearing. 
(b)  Second hearing. If the grievant wishes to have a second hearing, he should notify the department within 15 days after receiving the initial decision. The second hearing officer should schedule the second hearing within 15 days of receiving the request. If there is a second hearing, the second hearing officer should notify the grievant of his decision within 15 days of the hearing. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.205; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-40) 
Sec. 13-14. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The grievance hearing is intended to create a formal means for the grievant to communicate his complaint in an informal setting. Therefore, the hearing officer should not represent management nor should there be other management representatives at the hearing. 
(b)  The hearing officer should listen to the grievant's presentation and question the grievant to obtain pertinent facts about the claim and the situation relevant to the claim. The employee will represent himself, but may bring witnesses to the hearing to testify. Both the grievant and the hearing officer may question the witnesses. 
(c)  A handicapped employee may be accompanied by an interpreter when that is necessary. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.206; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-41) 
Sec. 13-15. - Final decision of hearing officer. 
After the hearing, the hearing officer will review the claim, evidence and requested relief, and should report his decision in writing to the grievant according to the schedule in section 13-13. The decision of the hearing officer will be the final decision in each step of the grievance process. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.207; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-41) 
Secs. 13-16—13-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPEAL 

Sec. 13-25. - Defined. 
An appeal is a formal review of an action or a decision made by the appointing authority. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.400; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-26. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the appeal is to ensure that due process is available to handicapped employees and to give other employees an equal opportunity to voice their views formally. It is also intended to help prevent violations of these policies and unlawful discrimination. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.401; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-27. - Who may file; appealable decisions. 
(a)  An appeal to the appointing authority may be filed by covered employees and handicapped employees as a result of claims of: 
(1)  An adverse action; 
(2)  Unlawful discrimination against an employee; or 
(3)  Other unlawful or unjust practices that adversely affect an employee. 
(b)  Subsections (2) and (3) of this section must be grieved before they can be appealed. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.402; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-28. - Time for filing. 
An appellant must file an appeal with the mayor and council within 15 days of learning of the event or decision. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.403; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-29. - Content of appeal; determination of sufficiency. 
The appeal shall contain a statement describing what is being appealed. The mayor and council will determine if the case is appealable, with merit, and properly filed. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.403; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-30. - Notice of appeal hearing. 
If appealable, the hearing officer will notify the appellant of the date, time and place of the hearing, and the name of the hearing officer. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.403; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-31. - City attorney to serve as hearing officer. 
The city attorney will serve as the hearing officer for all appeals. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.404; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-32. - Orderly procedure required. 
The hearing process is intended to be less formal than a court hearing, but orderly. To ensure orderliness, the hearing procedure for a civil case in Georgia's superior courts will be used. 
Sec. 13-33. - Parties may proceed pro se or through legal counsel. 
Both the appointing authority and the appellant may represent themselves at the appeal hearing, or either may choose to be represented by an attorney. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.406; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-34. - Recommendation of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer will compile evidence, prepare findings of facts and conclusions of law, and issue a recommendation to the appointing authority. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.405; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-35. - Time for rendering recommendation; notice to employee. 
The hearing officer shall submit the recommendation to the appointing authority within 15 days after completion of the hearing, and the appointing authority will notify the appellant of the final decision within seven days after receiving the recommendation. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.407; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
Sec. 13-36. - Decision on appeal is final. 
The decision of the appointing authority will be the final decision. 
(Pers. Man. § 7, Par. 7.407; Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-43) 
MANUAL COMPARATIVE TABLE PERSONNEL MANUAL 
This table gives the location within this Manual of those sections of the Personnel Manual which are included herein. Sections of the Personnel Manual not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
MANUAL COMPARATIVE TABLE COMPILED ORDINANCES OF 1998 
This table gives the location within this Personnel Manual of those sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 1998 that are included herein. Sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 1998 not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
MANUAL COMPARATIVE TABLE POLICIES, RESOLUTIONS, AND ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Manual of those policies, resolutions, and ordinances which are included herein. Policies and ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
;sz=10; This table shows the location within this Personnel Manual, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 