THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF TOWNS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Sole Commissioner 
____________ Adopted May 21, 2015 Effective May 21, 2015 
____________ 

OF TOWNS COUNTY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bill Kendall 
Sole Commissioner 
____________ 
Linda Hedden 
County Clerk 
____________ 
C. Robb Kiker, Jr. 
County Attorney 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Towns County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions of general and permanent effect adopted by the county through October 16, 2008. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance or resolution included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes that tie related sections of the Code together and that refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Karen Kopetskie, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Bill Kendall, Sole Commissioner; Cadman Robb Kiker, Jr., County Attorney; Linda Hedden, County Clerk, and Andrea Anderson, Deputy County Clerk for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Towns County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Towns County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Towns County, Georgia. 2013. 
A RESOLUTION OF  TOWNS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
WHEREAS, the Ordinances of Towns County were to be codified by Order of the Sole Commissioner; and 
WHEREAS, Towns County contracted with Municipal Code Corporation (hereinafter referred to as "Municode") to publish The Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, Municode has produced a compilation of Ordinances designated and enumerated as The Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED and it is hereby resolved that The Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia Published 2013 by Order of the Sole Commissioner is hereby adopted this 21st day of May, 2015. 

 ATTEST: 

[SEAL] 
1 st Reading, April 16, 2015 
2 nd Reading, May 21, 2015 
A RESOLUTION OF  TOWNS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
WHEREAS, the Sole Commissioner of Towns County has adopted The Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia by Resolution on today's date; and 
WHEREAS, during the review of the compilation of Ordinances as prepared by Municipal Code Corporation (hereinafter referred to as "Municode") the Sole Commissioner discovered amendments and modifications to certain Ordinances which were not incorporated into the "Published in 2013 by Order of the Sole Commissioner" version of Municode; and 
WHEREAS, the Sole Commissioner of Towns County desires that said amendments and modifications be incorporated as contained in the attached Ordinances of Towns County. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED and it is hereby resolved that the attached Ordinances of Towns County be and hereby are the "as adopted" latest edition of each said Ordinance and shall be incorporated by Municode into the subsequent edition thereof. 
So Resolved this 21st day of May, 2015. 

 ATTEST: 

[SEAL] 
1 st Reading, April 16, 2015 
2 nd Reading, May 21, 2015 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I contains portions of selected state laws of local application as requested by the county. Amendments to the original acts are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Section catchlines that have been supplied or altered by the editor are indicated in brackets, as are additions made for clarity. Formal citations should be to the original acts and not to this compilation. 

ARTICLE I. - ACT CREATING TOWNS COUNTY, GEORGIA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 51), p. 121, that created the county. 

Sec. I. - [County limits designated.] 
Be it enacted, That from and immediately after the passage of this act a new county shall be, and the same is hereby laid out from the counties of Union and Rabun to be included within the following limits, to-wit: Beginning at the North Carolina line at the north-west corner of Rabun county, and thence running east with said line to the north-east corner of lot of land number ninety-four in the first district of Rabun county, thence running south to the south-east corner of lot number sixty-seven in the said first district, thence running a straight line to the south-east corner of lot of land number one hundred and seventy-two in the eighteenth district and first section of Union county, thence along the top of the Blue Ridge south-westerly to the corner of Habersham county, thence along the top of said Blue Ridge to the main Ridge that divides the waters of Notley and Hiwassee rivers, thence along the top of said Ridge, westerly, to the Brass town, Bald mountain, thence in the same direction to the Double Knobbs, thence to the highest point of a Ridge on lot number one hundred and ninety-one, (191) in the seventeenth district and first section, thence a straight line to the Gap of the Mountain at the head of Langham's Creek, thence with the main leading Ridge in a north-western direction to the highest peak of the mountain, at the head of Gum Log Creek, thence down said Gum Log Creek to the North Carolina line, thence along the dividing line between North Carolina and Georgia to the beginning point. 
Sec. II. - [New county named.] 
And be it further enacted, That the new county described in the first section of this act, shall be called and known by the name of Towns, and shall be attached to the Blue Ridge Judicial Circuit, to the Sixth Congressional District, and to the Brigade and Division to which said territory now belongs. 
Sec. III. - [Voters to elect justices.] 
And be it further enacted, That the persons included within said new county entitled to vote shall, on the first Monday in April next elect five Justices of the Inferior Court and Ordinary, the Clerk of the Superior Court, Clerk of the Inferior Court and Sheriff, a Coroner, a Tax Collector and Receiver of Tax Returns, a County Surveyor and County Treasurer for said county, and that said election for said officers shall be held at the several places where Justices' Courts are now held within the limits of said new county, that the Justices of the Inferior Court shall hold their offices until the first Monday in January, 1857, that the Receiver of Tax Returns and Tax Collectors shall hold their offices until the first Monday in January, 1857, the Sheriff, Coroner, County Surveyor and Clerks of the Superior and Inferior Courts until the first Monday in January, 1858, and the Ordinary of said county until the first Monday in January, 1860, and until their successors are respectively elected and qualified, and the Governor on the same being certified to him shall commission the persons returned as elected at such elections; and said Justices of the Inferior Court after they shall have been commissioned, shall proceed as soon as possible to lay off said county into Militia Districts, and to advertise for the election of two Justices of the Peace in each District in which no Justice, now in commission, may reside, and in case one Justice in commission shall reside in any one of said districts then one other shall be elected for said district, and the Governor on being duly certified of the election of such Justices shall commission them according to law, and all officers now in commission within the limits of said new county shall hold their commissions, and exercise the duties of their several offices within said county for the terms, respectively, for which they were elected, and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
Sec. IV. - [Power and authority of justices.] 
And be it further enacted, That the Justices of the Inferior Court of said county, after they shall have been commissioned and qualified, shall have full power and authority to select and locate a site for the public buildings of said county, and said Justices, or a majority of them are hereby authorized and invested with full power to purchase a tract of land for the location of the county site, to divide the same into lots and sell each lot at public sale to the highest bidder, for the benefit of said county, and to make such other arrangements or contracts concerning the county site and the location of the public buildings as they may think proper. 
Sec. V. - [Election precincts established.] 
And be it further enacted, That so soon as the Justices of the Inferior Court for said county shall have laid off said Militia Districts, the places of holding Justices' Courts in said districts, respectively, be, and each of them is hereby established an Election Precinct. 
Sec. VI. - [Transfer of pending business to new county.] 
And be it further enacted, That all mesne process, execution and other final process in the hands of the Sheriff, Coroner and Constables of the counties of which the new county may be formed, and which properly belongs to said new county, and which may have been levied, or in part executed, and such proceedings therein, not finally disposed of, at the time when the officers of the said new county shall receive their commission, shall be delivered over to the corresponding officers of said new county and such officers are hereby authorized and required to proceed with the same, in the same manner as if such mesne process, execution or other final process had been originally in their hands, Provided, that in all cases publication of the time and places of sale or other like proceedings in the new county, shall be made for the time now prescribed by law, and all papers appertaining to all, or any suits, or prosecutions pending in the counties out of which said new county is formed, when the defendant resides in said new county, shall be transferred to the proper officers of said new county and there tried and disposed of. 
Sec. VII. - [Days of court proceedings.] 
And be it further enacted, That the Superior Court of said new county shall be held on the fourth Monday in April and October in each year, and the Inferior Courts on the third Mondays in June and December. 
Sec. VIII. - [Superintendents of elections to meet the day after election.] 
And be it further enacted, That the Superintendents of elections in said new county shall meet at the usual place of holding Justices' Courts in the 990th Militia District in said new county, on the next day after the election, for the purpose of consolidating said election returns. 
Sec. IX. - [Civil, military officers may take oath.] 
Be it further enacted, That all civil and military officers elected in said new county may take the usual oath of office before any person qualified by law to administer an oath. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLE COMMISSIONER OF TOWNS COUNTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 762), p. 4130, that created the office of the sole commissioner of the county. This act amended, revised, superseded and consolidated former laws pertaining to the governing authority of the county. 

Sec. 1. - [Office of commissioner created.] 
There is created the office of commissioner of Towns County as the governing authority of said county. The commissioner shall exercise the powers and duties and be charged with the responsibilities imposed upon said officer by this Act. 
Sec. 2. - [Commissioner to be elected.] 
(a)	The first commissioner of Towns County provided for by this Act shall be elected at the general election of 1984 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1985, for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following the election for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(b)	The commissioner shall be elected by a majority of the qualified voters of Towns County voting on a county-wide basis. The commissioner shall be nominated and elected in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. known as the "Georgia Election Code." [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 3. - [Vacancy to be filled by special election.] 
(a)	In the event a vacancy occurs for any reason in the office of commissioner of Towns County, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by special election. Such special election shall be called by the election superintendent of Towns County within ten days after the date of the vacancy and shall be held not less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the date of the issuance of the call. Such special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. known as the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
(b)	From the date of the occurrence of a vacancy until such vacancy is filled by special election as provided for by subsection (a) of this section, the judge of the Probate Court of Towns County shall be vested with and exercise the powers and duties of the commissioner of Towns County. 
Sec. 4. - [Commissioner to take oath.] 
Before entering upon the discharge of the commissioner's duties, a person elected commissioner shall subscribe to an oath before the judge of the Probate Court of Towns County for the true and faithful performance of duties as commissioner and that the person is not the holder of any unaccounted for public funds. 
Sec. 5. - [Commissioner to give surety bond.] 
The commissioner shall give a satisfactory surety bond approved by the judge of the Probate Court of Towns County and payable to said officer and filed in the office of the judge of the probate court in the sum of $25,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the commissioner's office. The cost of such bond shall be paid from the funds of Towns County. 
Sec. 6. - [Compensation.] 
(a)	The commissioner shall be compensated in the amount of $19,500.00 per annum, which shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Towns County. 
(b)	The commissioner may be reimbursed from county funds for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by that officer in the performance of the official duties of the office of commissioner. 
Editor's note— The compensation amount stated herein in no longer accurate. O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24 and O.C.G.A. § 36-5-25 provide minimum compensation for commissioners and provide authority and procedure for counties having a sole commissioner to establish the commissioner's compensation under home rule powers. 
Sec. 7. - [Commissioner shall work full time.] 
(a)	The commissioner shall devote full time to the business and interests of Towns County in the performance of the commissioner's duties. 
(b)	The commissioner shall have and maintain an office for the transaction of county business at the courthouse of Towns County. The office of the commissioner shall remain open during regular hours of business on all days except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Sec. 8. - [Powers of commissioner.] 
The commissioner shall have the power to fix and establish, policies, rules, and regulations governing all matters within the commissioner's jurisdiction as the governing authority of the county. The commissioner may exercise the powers and shall be subject to the duties and responsibilities now or hereafter provided by the Constitution and general laws of this state relative to county governing authorities. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following specific powers are vested in the commissioner: 
(1)	To levy taxes; 
(2)	To make appropriations; 
(3)	To fix rates and charges for services provided by the county; 
(4)	To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)	To order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)	To authorize and enter into contracts; 
(7)	To establish, alter, open, close, build, repair, or abolish public roads, private ways, bridges, and ferries, according to law; 
(8)	To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law; 
(9)	To allow the insolvent lists for the county; 
(10)	To accept for the county the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of the county; 
(11)	To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts as authorized by law; 
(12)	To fix the bonds of county officers where same are not fixed by statute; 
(13)	To enact any ordinances, resolutions, or other legislation the county may be given authority to enact; 
(14)	To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(15)	To call bond elections; and 
(16)	To exercise all of the power and authority heretofore vested by law in the judge of the probate court when sitting for county purposes, together with all power and authority which may hereafter be delegated by law to the governing authority of Towns County or to the governing authorities of counties generally. 
Sec. 9. - [Commissioner to require county officers to report on finances.] 
The commissioner is authorized to require all county officers to report on the general or specific conduct of the financial affairs of their respective offices. 
Sec. 10. - [Commissioner to have power over compensation of county employees.] 
(a)	The commissioner shall have the exclusive power and authority to appoint, remove, and fix the compensation of all employees of the county. 
(b)	The appointment and removal of, and the compensation to be paid to, persons filling offices and positions created by state statute, where not otherwise prescribed by such statute, shall be made and fixed by the commissioner. 
Sec. 11. - [Commissioner to comply with state law regarding budgeting and auditing.] 
The commissioner shall comply with the budgeting and auditing procedures and requirements set forth in Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.], relative to budgets and audits of local governments. 
Sec. 12. - [County funds expended in accordance with county budget.] 
The expenditure of county funds shall be made in accordance with the county budget or amendments thereto adopted by the commissioner. The commissioner shall enforce compliance with this requirement by all departments of county government, including the departments of the elected county officers, and to this end, the commissioner shall institute a system to control county purchasing and to account for the expenditure of all funds budgeted and appropriated by the commissioner. 
Sec. 13. - [Effective date.] 
The provisions of this Act necessary for the election in 1984 of the commissioner of Towns County created by this Act shall be effective upon the approval of this Act by the Governor or upon its otherwise becoming law. This Act shall become effective for all purposes on January 1, 1985. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWNS COUNTY WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1341), p. 3407, as amended, that created the Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority. 

Sec. 1. - Short Title. 
This shall be known and may be cited as the "Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority, which shall be deemed to be a public corporation and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the Authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of its officers, agents or employees. The Authority shall consist of five (5) members, one of whom shall be a resident freeholder of Macedonia-Tate militia district; one of whom shall be a resident freeholder of Hiawassee militia district; one of whom shall be a resident freeholder of Young Harris militia district; one of whom shall be a resident freeholder of the Town of Young Harris; and one of whom shall be a resident freeholder of the Town of Hiawassee, all in Towns County. The terms of the first members of said Authority shall be as follows: 
The member appointed from the Young Harris district shall serve until March 31, 1973, the two (2) members appointed from the Town of Hiawassee and Hiawassee district shall serve until March 31, 1974, and the two (2) members appointed from Macedonia-Tate district and the Town of Young Harris shall serve until March 31, 1975. 
Thereafter all members selected and appointed shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until their successors shall have been selected and appointed. Any members of the Authority may be selected and appointed to succeed themselves. Immediately after such appointments, the members of such Authority shall enter upon their duties. Any vacancy on the Authority shall be filled by the majority vote of the remaining members of said Authority and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as vice-chairman, and it shall also elect a secretary and treasurer who do not necessarily have to be a member of the Authority and if not a member of the Authority he or she shall have no voting rights. The secretary and treasurer may be the same person in the discretion of the Authority. Three (3) members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the Authority. The members of the Authority shall be compensated as determined from time to time by the governing authority of Towns County; however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The Authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
The initial members of the Authority shall be the following named persons and each of said persons shall serve as a member of the Authority for the number of years set forth opposite their respective names: 
Macedonia-Tate District — Carroll Underwood — Three (3) Years 
Hiawassee District — B. H. Abbott — Two (2) Years 
Young Harris District — Jimmy Rogers — One (1) Year 
Town of Young Harris — William T. Stewart — Three (3) Years 
Town of Hiawassee — John D. Marlin — Two (2) Years 
Thereafter, members shall be appointed by the grand jury of Towns County at the March term of the Supreme Court of said county. In the event the time of convening said March grand jury should be changed, the election of such members of the Authority shall be made at the spring terms of said grand jury but such change shall not affect the time of expiration of the terms of the members of the Authority. Each member so elected shall be elected for a term of three (3) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. The Authority shall meet at least annually in the month of January in each year and at such other times as it may deem necessary. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 47), p. 2694) 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)	The word "Authority" shall mean the Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority created by Section 2 of this Act. 
(b)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Towns County, and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate water system, the acquisition, construction and equipping of sewerage facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds and lagoons, within and without the territorial boundaries of Towns County, and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate sewerage system. Said water facilities and said sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the Authority, may be combined at any time as one revenue producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(c)	The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents' and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expense, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the cost of the acquisition or construction of any project, the placing of any project in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)	The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36 et seq., as amended) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761 et seq., as amended) and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto, and in addition, shall also mean obligations of the Authority the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)	Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have the following powers: 
(a)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)	To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every king and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, the Authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any other lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is hereby authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the State title to such lands to the Authority upon payment to the State Treasurer for the credit of the general fund of the State of the reasonable value of such lands in accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Georgia; 
(d)	To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)	To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and the State and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State, and any agency, corporation or political subdivision of any other State, are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties and other political subdivisions and to the Authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of services and facilities by the Authority to such municipal corporations, counties and political subdivisions for a term not exceeding fifty (50) years; 
(f)	To acquire, construct, own, repair, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, maintain and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the Authority or from such proceeds and any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)	To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(h)	To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(i)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; and 
(k)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Same—form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered from, or both, as the Authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
Sec. 7. - Same—signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the Authority and official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary and treasurer of the Authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary and treasurer of the Authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Sec. 8. - Same—negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State. Such bonds, their transfer and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Sec. 9. - Same—sale; proceeds. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same—interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same—replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds and coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same—conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other that those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Towns County nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporation. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking Fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collection of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the Authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 19. - Validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the State or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exist, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the Authority issuing the same, and the State and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Towns County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
Sec. 20. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Towns County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to the validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 21. - Interests of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and right of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, a grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 23. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of a water system, a sewerage system or a combined water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Sec. 24. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
Sec. 25. - Tort immunity. 
The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Towns County; and the officers, agents and employees of the Authority when in the performance of the work of the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of Towns County when in performance of their public duties or work of the County. 
Sec. 26. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This Act does not in any way take from Towns County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate and maintain a water system, a sewerage system or a combined water and sewerage system, or to issue revenue bond as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law. 
Sec. 27. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWNS COUNTY RECREATION AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 248), p. 4139, that created the Towns County Recreation Authority. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Towns County Recreation Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Towns County Recreation Authority. 
(a)	There is created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Towns County Recreation Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)	The Authority shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Towns County. The members shall be appointed for terms of office of four years, provided that the initial appointments by the Board of Commissioners of Towns County shall be three members for terms of four years, three members for terms of two years, and one member for a term of three years. A vacancy in the membership of the Authority shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be a resident of Towns County, Georgia, for at least two years prior to the date of his or her appointment, and shall not have been convicted of a felony. Any member of the Authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. Immediately after such appointments the members of the Authority shall enter upon their duties. 
(c)	The members of the Authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services but shall be entitled to and shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(d)	The members of the Authority shall elect one of their number as chairperson and another as a vice chairperson. The members of the Authority shall also elect a secretary, who need not be a member of the Authority, and may also elect a treasurer, who need not be a member of the Authority. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. If the secretary or treasurer is not a member of the Authority, such officer shall have no voting rights. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(e)	Four members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the Authority. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)	"Authority" means the Towns County Recreation Authority created by this Act. 
(2)	"Costs of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges; interest prior to and during construction and for six months after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents', and legal expenses, plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act; working capital; and all other costs necessary to acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain the project. 
(3)	"Project" means: 
(A)	An athletic stadium or stadiums, recreational centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, hiking, camping, and picnicking areas, swimming pools, lakes, golf courses, tennis courts, athletic fields and courts, clubhouses and gymnasiums, and all facilities appertaining to such stadiums and recreational centers and areas; and 
(B)	Any undertaking permitted by the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(4)	"Revenue Bond Law" means Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," or any other similar law hereinafter enacted. 
(5)	"Revenue bonds" means revenue bonds issued by the Authority pursuant to the terms of this Act and Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(6)	"Self-liquidating" means any project which the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom, including but not limited to any contractual payments with governmental or private entities, and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith, together with any grants, will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project and to pay the principal and interest on the revenue bonds or other obligations which may be issued for the purpose of paying the costs of the project. 
(7)	"State" means the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have the power: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)	To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or otherwise and to hold, operate, maintain, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation, in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, the Authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act, except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is to be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)	To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations. All employees shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the Authority; 
(5)	To execute contracts, leases, agreements, and instruments necessary or convenient in connection with the acquisition, construction, addition, extension, improvement, equipping, operation, or maintenance of a project; and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state, and any institution, department, or other agency thereof, and any county, municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of the state are authorized by this Act to enter into contracts, leases, agreements, or instruments with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable and as they are authorized by law; 
(6)	To acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain projects; 
(7)	To pay the costs of the project with the proceeds of revenue bonds or other obligations issued by the Authority or from any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the state or any agency or instrumentality or other political subdivision thereof or from any other source whatsoever; 
(8)	To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(9)	To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the state or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the state or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(10)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue revenue bonds, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to incur short-term debt and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness; and 
(12)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the Authority created by this Act, shall have power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the Authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the costs of the project and for the purpose of refunding revenue bonds or other obligations previously issued. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided by this Act for such payment. The revenue bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution for the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Revenue bonds; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the revenue bonds and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the revenue bonds. The revenue bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine, and provision may be made for registration and exchangeability privileges. The Authority shall fix the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. 
Sec. 7. - Revenue bonds; signatures; seal. 
All such revenue bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairperson or vice chairperson of the Authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority, and the official seal of the Authority shall be impressed or imprinted thereon. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of the chairperson or vice chairperson and the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority. Any revenue bonds or coupons attached thereto may bear the manual or facsimile signature of such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such revenue bonds or coupons shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of issuance of such revenue bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any revenue bond or any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such revenue bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if that person had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Revenue bonds; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. All revenue bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within this state. 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bonds; sale; price; proceeds. 
The Authority may sell revenue bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be in the best interest of the Authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of revenue bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Revenue bonds; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive revenue bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary revenue bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive revenue bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may provide for the replacement of any revenue bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Revenue bonds; conditions precedent to issuance. 
The Authority shall adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds. In the resolution, the Authority shall determine that the project financed with the proceeds of the revenue bonds is self-liquidating. Revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Towns County, Georgia, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in Section 16 of this Act. The issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever for payment of such revenue bonds or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such revenue bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, this Act shall not affect the ability of the Authority and said county to enter into an intergovernmental contract pursuant to which said county agrees to pay amounts sufficient to pay operating charges and other costs of the Authority or any project including, without limitation, the principal of and interest on revenue bonds in consideration for services or facilities of the Authority. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issuance of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside the state. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of the revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition and construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the Authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the revenue bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes thereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking fund. 
The moneys received pursuant to any intergovernmental contract and the revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such revenues, fees, tolls, fines, charges, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which revenue bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)	The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)	The principal or purchase price of such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)	Any premium upon such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(4)	The purchase of such revenue bonds in the open market; and 
(5)	The necessary charges of the paying agent for paying principal and interest. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the revenue bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state, including specifically but without limitation, the "Revenue Bond Law," or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the Authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, fines, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Validation. 
Revenue bonds and the security therefor shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the "Revenue Bond Law." [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the state, and any institution, department, or other agency thereof, and any county, municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of the state which has contracted with the Authority for services or facilities relating to the project for which revenue bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such defendant shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts shall not be adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such revenue bonds. The revenue bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such revenue bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the Authority and all other defendants. 
Sec. 19. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against the Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Towns County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 20. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the revenue bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said Authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such revenue bonds and, upon the issuance of such revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 21. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 22. - Purpose of the Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of providing recreational services and facilities and other public services and facilities for the citizens in the Towns County, Georgia, and environs, including other counties and municipalities. 
Sec. 23. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The Authority is authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect revenues, tolls, fees, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues, to issue revenue bonds or other types of obligations as provided in this Act to finance, in whole or in part, the costs of the project, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said revenue bonds or other obligations all or any part of the revenues. 
Sec. 24. - Rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for the operation of any project or projects constructed or acquired under the provisions of this Act, including the basis upon which recreational services and facilities and other public services and facilities shall be furnished. The Authority may adopt bylaws. 
Sec. 25. - Tort immunity. 
To the extent permitted by law, the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Towns County, Georgia; and the officers, agents, and employees of the Authority when in the performance of the work of the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Towns County, Georgia, when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
Sec. 26. - Tax-exempt status of Authority. 
The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the state and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any municipality, county, or the state and any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 27. - Effect on other governments. 
This Act shall not and does not in any way take from Towns County, Georgia, or any county or municipality the authority to own, operate, and maintain recreational facilities or to issue revenue bonds as provided by the "Revenue Bond Law" [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. 
Sec. 28. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. 
Sec. 29. - Severability; effect of partial invalidity of Act. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
ARTICLE V. - GEORGIA MOUNTAIN FAIR AUTHORITY OF TOWNS COUNTY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), p. 3776, as amended, that created the Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County, Georgia. 

Sec. 1. - Short Title. 
This may be cited as the "Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County Act". 
Sec. 2. - Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County. 
(a)	There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the Authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the Authority. The Authority is hereby granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the Authority as provided under the provisions of this Act. 
(b)	The Authority shall be composed of the following five members: Robert L. Anderson, Ray Taylor, H. D. Paris, J. W. Denton, and Dale Thurman. 
In the event a vacancy occurs on the authority for any reason, the remaining members shall appoint a citizen and resident of Towns County to fill such vacancy. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the authority. The authority is empowered to elect its own chairman, vice chairman, and secretary from its membership. The members of the authority shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 77), § 1, p. 3776) 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)	The word "Authority" shall mean the Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County created in Section 2 of this Act. 
(b)	(1)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, and operation of buildings for the housing of exhibits for fairs and the usual facilities, furnishings, equipment, and real and personal property related thereto, and extensions and improvements of such buildings, equipment, facilities, and property, the acquisition of the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such buildings, facilities, furnishings, and equipment, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such facilities and areas, deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or desirable. 
(2)	The word "project" shall also mean and include the acquisition, construction, improvement, modification, expansion, modernization, equipping, or remodeling of any property, real or personal, which shall be used as or in connection with a hotel or motel that provides food and lodging for transient guests with not less than 80 guest rooms available for overnight accommodations, marinas, condominiums, and public or private facilities, which are declared to be projects of sufficient magnitude to result in substantial economic benefit upon the geographical area served by the authority, and to promote attendance at fairs and events held in facilities of the authority." 
(c)	The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the Authority's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of all machinery, furnishings and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, or the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)	The terms "revenue bonds", "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36) [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the Authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)	Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 77), § 2, p. 3776) 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)	To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Towns County or in any municipality incorporated in said County, the governing authority or body of said County or of any of said municipalities, is hereby authorized to convey title to such lands to the Authority upon payment to the credit of the general funds of said County or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governing authority or body of said County or municipality and the Chairman of the Authority; 
(d)	To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)	To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to dispose by conveyance of its title in fee simple of real and personal property of every kind and character, and any and all persons, firms and corporations, the State and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the Authority to enter into contracts, lease and sublease agreements, with the State of Georgia, or any agencies or departments thereof relative to buildings and facilities, areas and facilities and relative to any property, which such department or other agency or department of the State of Georgia has now, or may hereafter obtain, by lease from the United States Government or any agency or department thereof and the Authority is specifically authorized to convey title, in fee simple, to any and all of its lands and any improvements thereon to any persons, firms, corporations, counties, municipalities, the State of Georgia or the United States Government, or any agency or department thereof, subject to the rights and interests of the holders of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the Authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in Section 17 of this Act; 
(f)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the Authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)	To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(h)	To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(i)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; 
(k)	The Authority and the trustee acting under the trust indenture, are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the Authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in Section 17 hereof; 
(l)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes from any bank, banks or other lending institutions for a period of time not to exceed forty (40) years and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same by assigning all rights to and pledging all funds to be received by the Authority from a lease or leases entered into by the Authority as the lessor and Towns County as the lessee; 
(m)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue Bonds. 
This Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed in the Revenue Bond Law or any amendment thereto. Interest shall be payable semi-annually, principal shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36) [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] and any amendments thereto. 
Sec. 6. - Same—Form; Denomination; Registration; Place of Payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places for payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to the principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Sec. 7. - Same—Signatures; Seal. 
All such bonds shall be signed by the Chairman of the Authority and attested by the Secretary and Treasurer of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the Chairman and Secretary and Treasurer of the Authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Same—Negotiability; Exemption From Taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of the State. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Sec. 9. - Same—Sale; Proceeds. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same—Interim Receipts and Certificates or Temporary Bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same—Replacement of Lost or Mutilated Bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same—Conditions Precedent to Issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit Not Pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Towns County, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said County, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said County to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
Sec. 14. - Trust Indenture as Security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the Authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 15. - To Whom Proceeds of Bonds Shall Be Paid. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking Fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)	The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)	The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)	Any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment or otherwise; and 
(4)	The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)	Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not be reissued, printed and delivered. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of Bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Refunding Bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the Authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 19. - Venue and Jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Towns County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 20. - Validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department or agency of the United States Government, if subject to being sued and if consenting to same, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the State or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the Court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the Authority issuing the same, the State and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County. 
Sec. 21. - Interest of Bondholders Protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or Authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Moneys Received Considered Trust Funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 23. - Purpose of the Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining and operating buildings for housing of exhibits for fairs and the usual facilities, furnishings, equipment, and property related thereto, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring parking areas in connection therewith, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the Authority, necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Sec. 24. - Rates, Charges and Revenues; Use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereafter made or the sale of any of its lands and facilities. 
Sec. 25. - Rules and Regulations for Operation of Projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which facilities shall be furnished. 
Sec. 26. - [Meetings of the Authority to be open to the public.] 
(a)	All meetings of the Authority shall be opened to the public at all times. Ample notice shall be given to all members of the Authority and to the public of any special or called meeting of the Authority. The minutes of all meetings and all actions taken by the Authority shall likewise be opened to public inspection. 
(b)	Each purchase made in behalf of the Authority of personal property or services in excess of $5000.00 shall be accomplished pursuant to competitive bids, after having published invitations to bid in the official organ of Towns County prior to the award of any contract. All bids shall be opened during meetings of the Authority and the rejection or acceptance thereof shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority. 
(c)	Any surplus or unserviceable property of the Authority shall be disposed of pursuant to competitive bids which shall be advertised in the official organ of Towns County. All bids for the disposal of such property shall be opened during public meetings of the Authority and the acceptance and rejection thereof shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority. 
(d)	The affirmative action of at least two members of the Authority shall be required in order that any action on behalf of the Authority may be taken. 
(e)	At the conclusion of each fiscal year of the Authority, the affairs of the Authority shall be audited by a certified public accounting firm. A synopsis of the audit shall be published in the official organ of Towns County as soon as the report of the auditors is submitted to the Authority. 
(f)	All funds of the Authority which are not required for the normal operations of the Authority shall be invested in interest bearing investments within 30 days of their receipt by the Authority. 
Sec. 27. - Powers Declared Supplemental and Additional. 
The foregoing Sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 28. - Liberal Construction of Act. 
This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia and Towns County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 29. - Effect of Partial Invalidity of Act. 
Should any sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this Act be declared for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect such remainder of this Act or any part hereof, other than the part so held to be invalid, but the remaining provisions of this Act shall remain in full force and effect, and it is the express intention of this Act to enact each provision of this Act independently of any other provision hereof. 
Sec. 30. - County Powers. 
This Act does not in any way take from Towns County or any municipality located therein, the authority to own, develop, operate and maintain buildings or facilities, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36) [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended. 
ARTICLE VI. - TOWNS COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is an act of the general assembly as enacted by 2001 Ga. Laws (Act No. 659), p. 3876, that created the Towns County Board of Elections. 

Sec. 1. - [Created.] 
There is created the board of elections of Towns County which shall have jurisdiction over the conduct of primaries and elections in Towns County accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 2. - [Composition.] 
The board of elections of Towns County shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of the county and who shall be selected in the following manner: 
(1)	Two members of the board shall be selected by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for President of the United States in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member. Each selection shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of the executive committee voting at a regular scheduled meeting or at a meeting duly called and held for such purpose; selected name to be submitted to the governing authority of the county for appointment as members of the election board for Towns County; 
(2)	Two members of the board shall be selected by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for President of the United States in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member. Each selection shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of the executive committee voting at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a meeting duly called and held for such purpose; selected names to be submitted to the governing authority of the county for appointment as members of the election board for Towns County; 
(3)	The fifth member of the board of elections shall be appointed by the Judge of the Superior Court. Said appointment shall be made from a list of three names to be submitted to by the Grand Jury to the Judge of Superior Court. Said member shall not be an officer or member of the executive committee of any political party at the time of such member's selection or at any time during such member's term of office as a member of the board of elections. 
Sec. 3. - [Board members to elect chairman.] 
The members of the board of elections shall elect one of the members of the board to serve as chairman of the board. 
Sec. 4. - [Board members to designate executive secretary.] 
The executive secretary of the board of elections shall be designated by a majority of the board members and such executive secretary shall perform duties as may be specified by the board. 
Sec. 5. - [Initial appointments to board; terms.] 
In making the initial appointments to the board, the governing authority of Towns County shall appoint two members, one from each political party, for an initial term beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002; two members for an initial term beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2003; and one member for an initial term beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2004. Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, a successor to each member of the board shall be appointed for a term of four years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Each member of the board shall take office on January 1 of the year immediately following the year in which such member was appointed. 
Sec. 6. - [Holders of public office and family member not eligible to serve on board.] 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member during the term of such elective office and the position of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. Further, no immediate family member of an elective public official shall be eligible to serve as a member during the elected officials term of office. 
Sec. 7. - [Governing authority to make appointments.] 
The appointment of each member shall be made by the governing authority of Towns County by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court not later than 30 days preceding the date at which such member is to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each appointed member to the Secretary of State and shall provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members, within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 8. - [Rules of vacation of board membership.] 
Each member of the board shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as provided in this Act and shall: 
(1)	Be eligible to succeed himself or herself and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of his or her resignation to the governing authority of the county and to the clerk of the superior court; and 
(2)	Shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause after notice and hearing, in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for removal of registrars. 
Sec. 9. - [Governing authority to appoint successor when vacancy occurs before term expires.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office any member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the governing authority of Towns County shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. Such appointment shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment to such post. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of the executive secretary by reason of the death of the executive secretary or his or her removal or resignation, the office of executive secretary shall be filled by the person succeeding to the office. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of interim appointments or elections and changes in the office of the executive secretary and report and certify such appointments or elections and changes in the same manner as the regular appointments election of members and designations of the executive secretary. 
Sec. 10. - [Members to take oath.] 
Before entering upon his or her duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as is required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 11. - [Duties.] 
The board of elections shall: 
(1)	With regard to the preparation for conduct and administration of elections, succeed to and exercise all duties and powers granted to and incumbent upon the judge of the probate court pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, or any other provision of law, or both. 
(2)	With regard to the preparation for and conduct of primaries, succeed to all the duties and powers granted to and incumbent upon the judge of the probate court by Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
Sec. 12. - [Board responsible for poll workers.] 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections, and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
Sec. 13. - [Chairman shall be chief executive officer; duties.] 
The chairman of the board of elections shall be the chief executive officer of the board of elections and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board of elections pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board of elections. The board of elections shall at its first meeting establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the executions of matters within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 14. - [Compensation for board members.] 
Compensation for the members of the board of elections shall be in the same manner as registrars as prescribed in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated 21-2-212(d) [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212(d)]. Compensation for clerical assistants, and other employees shall be such as may be fixed by the governing authority of the county. Said compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 15. - [Suitable offices to be provided.] 
The governing authority of Towns County shall provide the board of elections with such proper and suitable offices and with such electrical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 16. - [Definitions.] 
The words "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the same meanings ascribed to those words by Chapter 2 of title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation of Code; citation. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, "The Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia" and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form, "Towns County Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied: 
Applicability. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county commissioner. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provisions, excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to the Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," or "neither … nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
The terms "either … or" and "neither … nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Towns County, Georgia. 
County commissioner. The term "county commissioner" means the governing authority of Towns County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the county court. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department; board; agency. The name or title of any department, board, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the County of Towns, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Gender. A word importing, the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the county commissioner of Towns County, Georgia. 
Incorporated limits or incorporated areas of the county. The term "incorporated limits" or "incorporated areas of the county" means all areas of the county that are not situated within the territorial limits of an incorporated town or city. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Joint authority. Whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of the county court. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)	The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)	In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the county commissioner, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)	All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the county commissioner may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" or "sworn." 
Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, officers, boards, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the term "of Towns County, Georgia". 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group action as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it shall mean place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. Reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the county governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved area between the curb line and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the county. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing or written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Notes and catch lines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)	The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the county commissioner or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the county commissioner. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of Towns County, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of Towns County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ ," which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the county commissioner. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-9. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the county clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the county commissioner to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the county commissioner. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the county clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-10. - Responsibility of county personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each county official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the county and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the county clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty: continuing violations, violations as public nuisance. 
(a)	In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the county to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the county officer or employee. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)	All sentences must be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law. 
(g)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief to include stop work orders and temporary restraining orders when applicable. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)	All fines shall be paid into the county treasury. 
(j)	In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)	If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of Georgia, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-12. - Additional statutory penalties; county jail fund deposits and disposition of funds. 
(a)	In every case in the superior court, probate court, magistrate court, or other court in the county shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state or any ordinance of a political subdivision thereof, shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)	At the time of posting bail or bond in any case before any court in the county involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or ordinance of the county, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any superior court, probate court, magistrate court or other court within the county shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-94. 
(c)	The additional penalty sums required by this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the judges of the Probate Court Retirement Fund of Georgia. 
(d)	The additional penalty sums required by this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting money arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid to the governing authority of the county by the tenth day of the month following the month in which the monies are collected. Such sums paid to the county shall be deposited by the county into a special account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(e)	Any person whose duty it is to collect and remit the sums provided for in this section who fails or refuses to remit such sums by the date required by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)	Money collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the county solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county jails, correctional institutions, and detention facilities or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with the state or other political subdivisions. The county jail fund and money collected pursuant to this section for placement in the county jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, correctional institutions, and detention facilities. This section shall not preclude the appropriation or expenditure of other funds by the county for the purpose of constructing, operating, or staffing county jails, correctional institutions, and detention facilities. 
(Res. of 1-15-1990, §§ 1—6) 
Sec. 1-13. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the county; 
(5)	Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the county; 
(8)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the county; 
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the county; 
(11)	Any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(12)	Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(13)	Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(14)	Any resolution of the county not in conflict with this Code; 
all such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-17. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)	If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)	If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)	If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-1 et seq.; authority of county officers to issuance citations for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-17; ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of a county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Militia districts. 
(a)	Effective July 1, 1982, the eight following numbered general militia districts shall thereafter encompass all of the county and have the same physical boundaries as the county. The consolidation district shall be known as the Towns County Consolidated Militia District. 
(b)	Militia districts, to wit: 
G.M.D. # 833 (Macedonia) 
G.M.D. # 918 (Gum Log) 
G.M.D. # 990 (Hiawassee) 
G.M.D. #1138 (Lower Hightower) 
G.M.D. #1243 (Hiawassee River) 
G.M.D. #1264 (Upper Hightower) 
G.M.D. #1468 (Young Harris) 
G.M.D. #1581 (Tate City) 
(Res. of 6-22-1982) 
State Law reference— Division of county into militia districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-2-1. 
Sec. 2-2. - Election office operation hours. 
(a)	The election office shall have regular office hours on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 8:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, during the 45-day period prior to a general election or primary and the time preceding a special election the election office shall have office hours on: 
(1)	Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 
(2)	Tuesdays from 8:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and 
(3)	Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(c)	The election office will close at 12:00 noon on the Saturday prior to the election and will be closed all day on the Monday immediately prior to the election, special election or primary to allow for preparation and set up for election on the following Tuesday (Election Day). 
(Ord. of 7-7-2009) 
Secs. 2-3—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY COMMISSIONER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Office established and defined by local Act. 
The election, term, compensation, oath, bond, authority, duties and responsibilities of the county commission shall be as set forth in that certain local Act establishing the office of county commissioner being 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 762), p. 4130. 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-46. - Meeting schedule; notice of meetings. 
The time, place and dates of regular meetings of the county commissioner shall be as established from time to time by the commissioner. Regular meetings shall be held on a business day, Monday through Friday, and not on official government holidays. Meetings shall be held in the county commissioner's office in the county courthouse. Notice of meetings shall be posted in accordance with applicable law. 
(Res. of 1-13-2003) 
State Law reference— Open meetings and notice of meetings required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meetings of governing bodies of counties and municipalities to be open, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1. 
Secs. 2-47—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, AUTHORITIES, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Conduct of members of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-66—2-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD 

Sec. 2-89. - Establishment; duties and authority. 
The county has established a parks and recreation board that shall have the duties and authority set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3, except as herein limited or amended. 
(Res. of 11-1-1973) 
Sec. 2-90. - Audit of financial records. 
The financial records of the parks and recreation board shall be audited annually by an independent certified public accountant and a copy of the audit submitted to the county ordinary. The parks and recreation board shall make such other reports to the county ordinary as may request from time to time. 
(Res. of 11-1-1973) 
Secs. 2-91—2-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGIONAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regional solid waste management authorities, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq. 

Sec. 2-140. - Establishment. 
The county, acting through the county commissioner, and in consort with other participating members, has established a regional solid waste management authority, as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq., to be known as the North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA). 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-141. - Charter member; lead county. 
(a)	The county shall be a charter member of the North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA). 
(b)	The commissioners of the charter member counties shall designate a lead county to act on the behalf of the NGWMA. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-142. - Board of directors; officers. 
(a)	The North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA) shall be governed by a board of directors. The initial board shall consist of seven members, with two members from each participating county. One commissioner of each of the original participating counties shall be a member of the board, and each of those commissioners shall appoint one additional member who shall be a resident of his county. The seventh member of the board shall be appointed by the other members of the board. Board members shall serve as provided by statute. No appointed board member shall hold any elected public office. 
(b)	The board of directors shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson. The directors shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, or a secretary-treasurer, who may be, but need not be, a director. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 2-143. - Powers. 
The North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA) shall have such other powers as are provided by statute or are implicit in the operation of the functional purposes of the NGWMA. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 2-144. - General manager. 
Routine operations of the North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA) shall be under the sole management and control of the general manager, to include supervision of any plant, center or other operation of the NGWMA. The general manager shall be hired by the board of directors and shall serve at its pleasure. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 2-145. - Funding. 
Funding shall be by annual budget, and the general manager shall be authorized to operate within said budget subject only to normal financial management and review. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 2-146. - Employees. 
(a)	All employees of the North Georgia Waste Management Authority (NGWMA) shall be employees of the lead county. The lead county shall be reimbursed by the NGWMA to the extent that the NGWMA has sufficient funds to cover all costs of employment, and all additional costs shall be covered pro rata by the counties that are members of the NGWMA. 
(b)	All employees shall receive the health and retirement benefits, and other personnel benefits, which are available to regular employees of the lead county. 
(c)	Members of the board of directors, unless they are also commissioners of a member county, shall be considered employees of the NGWMA and shall receive the same benefits as other employees. Board members shall otherwise receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for all expenses. 
(Res. of 5-9-1994, § 4) 
Secs. 2-147—2-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-208. - Established. 
A joint development authority, to be known as the Joint Development Authority of Fannin County, Towns County, and Union County (JDA), is hereby created and activated. The JDA shall transact business pursuant to, and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of the Development Authorities Law, codified in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Title 36, Chapter 62 (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.), as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(Res. of 3-28-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 2-209. - Joint authority. 
The joint development authority (JDA) created and activated by a joint resolution of the governing bodies of Fannin County, Towns County, and Union County shall function as a joint authority pursuant to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., specifically including O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. of 3-28-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 2-210. - Appointment, terms, and compensation of directors. 
(a)	The number of directors of the joint development authority (JDA) shall be nine. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in Fannin County and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Fannin County as their terms expire. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in Towns County and shall be appointed by the commissioner of Towns County as their terms expire. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in Union County and shall be appointed by the commissioner of Union County, as their terms expire. 
(b)	The directors shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(c)	The terms of office of all members shall be four years. If at the end of any term of any member a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. 
(Res. of 3-28-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 2-211. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the joint development authority (JDA) shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the JDA without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the JDA. 
(Res. of 3-28-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 2-212. - Officers. 
The directors of the joint development authority (JDA) shall elect one of their members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may, but need not be, a director. 
(Res. of 3-28-1995, § 4) 
Secs. 2-213—2-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-233. - Established; appointment and terms of members. 
The county has established the Towns County Industrial Development Authority (IDA). The IDA shall be made up of a total of nine members. For the initial terms only, seven members shall serve three-year terms, staggered on an annual basis, and two members shall serve four-year terms. At the expiration of the initial term of office, the successor members shall all serve four-year terms. Members of the IDA shall be appointed by the county commissioner, who shall also be responsible for filling all vacancies. 
(Res. of 8-26-2002; Res. of 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 2-234. - Duties and authority. 
The industrial development authority (IDA) shall have all of the rights, powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6. The IDA may adopt bylaws, elect officers, and hire employees and contract with consultants as it deems necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities. 
(Res. of 8-26-2002; Res. of 5-18-2006) 
Secs. 2-235—2-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - GEORGIA MOUNTAIN FAIR AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-262. - Activation. 
Pursuant to section 31 of the Georgia Mountain Fair Authority of Towns County Act, (Ga. Laws, 1980, pgs. 3134, 3148) the Georgia Mountain Fair Authority is hereby activated and shall become operative immediately. 
(Res. of 3-18-1981) 
Secs. 2-263—2-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-288. - Established; purpose and intent; duties. 
(a)	The county has created the Towns County Planning Commission. 
(b)	The planning commission shall review all subdivision plans submitted to the county pursuant to the county regulations governing the subdivision or resubdivision of land. 
(c)	The planning commission shall make recommendations to the county commissioner in reference to such plans and their compliance with said regulations. Such recommendations shall be made within the times specified within said regulations so as to allow the county commissioner sufficient time to review each such recommendation prior to issuing a decision concerning approval of each such submitted plan under the terms of said regulations. 
(d)	The planning commission shall make whatever further advisory recommendations to the county commissioner as the planning commission deems appropriate for future development and land use within the county. 
(e)	The planning commission shall have such further advisory duties as may be hereafter assigned to it by the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 4-XX-1988, art. I; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. I) 
Sec. 2-289. - Standards of review. 
The planning commission shall, in considering its recommendations, apply the standards set forth in the county regulations governing the subdivision or resubdivision of land, with reference to each such plan submitted. 
(Res. of 6-30-1988, art. I; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. I) 
Sec. 2-290. - Appointment of members; term; compensation. 
(a)	The planning commission shall consist of seven citizens and residents of the county. Each appointee shall have a term of three years unless otherwise sooner terminated by death, resignation, or removal from office. A member may be appointed to succeed himself for successive terms at the discretion of the county commissioner. 
(b)	The members shall receive compensation for their services in the amount established from time to time by the county commissioners. Nothing contained herein shall require the county commissioner to compensate or reimburse the members for their services. 
(Res. of 4-18-1988, art. II; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. II) 
Sec. 2-291. - Resignations; vacancies. 
Any member may resign from the planning commission by giving written notice to the county commissioner and to the chairperson of the planning commission. Such resignation shall become effective upon notice to the county commissioner. Any vacancy on the planning commission due to death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled by appointment by the county commissioner for the balance of the unexpired vacant term. 
(Res. of 4-18-1988, art. II; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. II) 
Sec. 2-292. - Meetings. 
(a)	Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held at the county courthouse at such regular dates and at such time as is established by the county commissioner; provided, that no regular meeting need be held if there is no business to be conducted by the commission. 
(b)	Special meetings. Special meetings of the planning commission may be called at any time by the chairperson or one-third of the members of the planning commission. Notice of a special meeting shall state the purpose for which such meeting is being called. 
(c)	Notice of meetings. Written notice of regular meetings shall be sent to each member of the planning commission stating the date, time and place of the meeting. Such notice shall be mailed or delivered not less than two days in advance of the date for which the meeting is called. Special meetings may be held on two days' advance notice which may be communicated in writing or orally to all members and evidence thereof being put into the minutes of such meeting. 
(d)	Quorum. A quorum at any meeting of the planning commission shall be constituted by a majority of the total members and ex officio members of the planning commission. An ex officio member shall serve as a voting member only for purposes of a meeting at which he is counted for constitution of the quorum. 
(e)	Voting. Each member, except the presiding officer, shall have one vote to cast in any matter properly brought before the planning commission for decision. The vote of a majority of the members present at any meeting at which a quorum is present shall decide any question properly brought before the meeting. The presiding officer shall cast the deciding vote in the event of a deadlock (tie) on any such decision. The amending of this resolution shall be authorized only by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the total members of the planning commission with the presiding officer having full voting rights. 
(f)	Proxies. No member shall be entitled to vote by proxy. 
(g)	Rules of order. Each meeting of the planning commission shall be governed by and shall proceed under Robert's Rules of Order; provided, however, that the planning commission may proceed under such other rules of order as may be decided upon by a unanimous resolution of the members. 
(Res. of 4-18-1988, art. III; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. III) 
Sec. 2-293. - Officers. 
(a)	Composition. The officers of the planning commission shall be as determined by the county commissioner. 
(b)	Duties of chairperson. The chairperson of the planning commission shall preside at all committee assignments; shall receive all committee recommendations and present to the planning commission any motions contained therein; shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees; and shall transmit reports, plans and recommendations of the planning commission to the appropriate governing authority. 
(c)	Duties of vice-chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson and when so acting shall have all the duties inherent in the office of chairperson. 
(d)	Duties of secretary. The secretary shall serve as the secretary of the meetings of the planning commission; shall send appropriate notices of meetings; shall serve as custodian of all records and reports of the planning commission and shall be responsible for keeping the minutes of all meetings. 
(Res. of 4-18-1988, art. IV; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. IV) 
Sec. 2-294. - Special committees. 
Upon a motion duly seconded and passed, the chairperson of the planning commission may from time to time appoint special committees comprised of members of the planning commission for such special tasks as shall be needful or desirable for the conduct of the affairs of the planning commission. Upon completion of the task for which such committee was appointed, the committee shall be discharged. 
(Res. of 4-18-1988, art. V; Res. of 3-15-1989, art. V) 
Secs. 2-295—2-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COUNTY DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT AND EDUCATION FUND ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

SEC. 2-300. - Penalties. 
By virtue of the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 15-21-100 and 15-21-101, additional penalties for offenses prohibited by O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-30, 16-13-30.1, and 16-13-31, which offenses relate to certain activities regarding marijuana, controlled substances and non-controlled substances shall be imposed and collected by the clerk of court. These funds shall be paid over to the commissioner of Towns County and shall be deposited into a special account known as the "Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund". 
(Res. of 4-18-2013(1), § 1) 
SEC. 2-301. - Advisory committee. 
An advisory committee to oversee the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund shall be formed and shall consist of the following individuals: 
(a)	The sole commissioner of Towns County. 
(b)	The chief judge of the superior court of Towns County. 
(c)	The district attorney of Towns County. 
(d)	The sheriff of Towns County. 
(e)	The clerk of the superior court of Towns County. 
The chief judge of the superior court of Towns County will serve as chairperson and will preside over meetings of the committee. 
This committee shall be known as the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund Advisory Committee. The purpose of said advisory committee is to review and approve all requests for funding and expenditures from the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund as delegated by the commissioner of Towns County. The governing authority of Towns County retains the authority to approve requests and expenditures from the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund as provided by law. 
(Res. of 4-18-2013(1), § 2; Amdt. of 10-25-2013(1), § 2) 
SEC. 2-302. - Fund and expenditures. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 15-21-101, all funds into the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund shall be used solely and exclusively for drug abuse treatment and education programs and operations thereof, relating to controlled substances and marijuana. Expenditures from this fund that are authorized and approved by the Towns County Drug Abuse Treatment and Education Fund Advisory Committee shall be in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the Committee. 
(Res. of 4-18-2013(1), § 3; Amdt. Of 10-25-2013(1), § 3) 
Secs. 2-303—2-321. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11. 

Sec. 2-322. - County tax assessors. 
County tax assessors, once appointed, shall continue to serve until their successors in office are qualified. 
Secs. 2-323—2-347. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-348. - Storage of official county documents. 
All official county resolutions, ordinances, policies and other such documents may be incorporated into the minutes by reference only and the actual documents will be stored in an alternative record book in the county commissioner's office, separate from the minute book, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-1-25. 
(Res. of 5-17-2007) 
Secs. 2-349—2-368. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-369. - Tax commissioner depository. 
The official depository for funds collected by the county tax commissioner shall be deposited in an FDIC-insured banking institution or institutions located with the county, as determined by the tax commissioner, and all funds collected by the county tax commissioner shall be deposited therein and collateralized as required by law. 
(Notice of 7-7-1964) 
Sec. 2-370. - Indigent funeral assistance policy. 
The county shall assist with the expenses of indigent funerals within the county to the extent set forth in this section and only if the following requirements are met: 
(1)	The deceased must have been a resident of the county at the time of death and have no property or personal possessions in the deceased name at the time of death valued over $200.00. 
(2)	The spouse of the deceased, if any, must have no property or personal possessions in the spouse's name valued over $200.00. 
(3)	Before payment by the county can be made, written certification must be made by the surviving spouse or relative verifying that the deceased, and his surviving spouse, if any, meet the requirements of this section. If there is no surviving spouse or relative, the funeral home director in charge of burial may certify to compliance with this section. 
(4)	The county will pay indigent funeral expenses upon certification as required herein and receipt of proper invoice from the funeral home director up to the amount established by the county commissioner or by governing statute, whichever is less. 
(Policy of 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 2-371. - Juvenile services fund. 
(a)	The county may establish a Towns County Supplemental Juvenile Services Fund that shall be a separate fund maintained by the county. 
(b)	In the event the fund is established, the county commissioner shall appropriate monies from said fund to the juvenile court for the court's discretionary use in providing the supplemental community-based services described in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-71 to juvenile offenders. 
(c)	In the event the fund is established, the fund shall be administered by the county. The court may draw upon it by submitting invoices to the county commissioner. The fund may be used only for these services. 
(d)	In the event the fund is established, any monies remaining in the fund at the end of the county fiscal year shall not revert to any other fund but shall continue in the county supplemental juvenile services fund, which shall not be used to replace other funding for county juvenile court services. 
(Res. of 6-13-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-372. - ACCG 401(a) defined contribution program. 
(a)	The county governing authority, at a meeting held [in] 2014, hereby adopts the ACCG 401(a) defined contribution program and shall amend, restate and replace the county's current plan for the benefit and participation of all eligible employees of the county effective January 1, 2015. 
(b)	The county hereby designates ACCG (or its designee) to administer the Plan. 
(c)	The sole commissioner is hereby authorized by the county to execute the plan document, administrative services agreement, trust agreement and any other documents necessary to implement the plan, and to take all further actions necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of the foregoing resolutions. It is the intent of the county governing authority that the provisions of the amended and restated plan be substantially similar to the provisions of the current plan particularly as they relate to determining employee eligibility, vesting schedules, county contributions and any other provisions that may relate to the amount and timing of employee benefits under the plan. 
(Res. of 9-15-2011(1)) 
Secs. 2-373—2-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-400. - Penalties and other remedies. 
(a)	Confirmed complaints shall result in action consistent with state law, including, but not limited to, the censure, reprimand, discipline, or termination of the member that is the subject of the investigation. 
(b)	In addition, suspected criminal action shall be referred to the office of the district attorney. 
(c)	In addition, remedies for violation of section 2-401(3) may include voiding of the general contract. 
(Res. of 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 2-401. - Conduct. 
Each member of the county's boards, commissions, and authorities shall abide by the county's code of ethics for government service. Each member shall: 
(1)	Uphold the Constitution, laws, and regulations of the United States, the state, and the county and never be a party to their evasion; 
(2)	Refrain from engaging in any business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the diligent performance of his governmental duties; 
(3)	Refrain from participating, either directly or indirectly in any financial transactions by general contract, by subcontract or in any other manner of monetary value on projects dealing with federal, state or county tax dollars in which the board, commission or authority issues a contract or sells public property; 
(4)	Refrain from using any information coming to him confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit; 
(5)	Refrain from attending or in any manner taking part in any meeting or discussion, or taking any official action, with regard to any matter under circumstances in which he knows or should know that he has a direct or indirect monetary interest in the subject matter or in the outcome of such official action. 
(Res. of 1-9-2006) 
State Law reference— Interested transactions prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14. 
Sec. 2-402. - Complaints; investigations. 
Upon receipt of a signed, sworn, and written complaint setting forth the specific details of the alleged ethics violation, the county commissioner or his appointed agent, shall investigate the complaint as the county deems appropriate with respect to the allegations contained within the sworn complaint. 
(Res. of 1-9-2006) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-19. - Regulations; prohibited acts. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail in the county or any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly sell beer or wine to a person under the age established by state law. 
(2)	Knowingly sell beer or wine to any person when such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)	Sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages or wine where such person does not have a license from the county commissioner to sell or possess for sale such beverages. 
(4)	License malt beverages or wine to be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by any other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the county commissioner to make deliveries in the county. Transportation of malt beverages and wine by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of wholesale license. 
(5)	Engage in the sale of such beverages on Sunday, Christmas Day, or any other days prohibited by state law. 
(6)	Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a license by the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VI; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VI) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days, and Christmas Day generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; local regulation of Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale of alcoholic beverage to intoxicated person, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22; furnishing to, possession of, or purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-20. - Qualifications for licensure. 
Qualifications for licensure are as follows: 
(1)	The retail licensee must be a person over the age of 21 years and a citizen of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Excepting vintner licensees who operate wine tasting rooms on premises, said licensee must have owned or operated the business within the county, from which malt beverages and wine will be sold, for a period of 30 days or more prior to application for said retail license and at least 50 percent of the gross weekly sales generated by licensee's business for which a retail malt beverage and wine license is granted must originate from the sale of products other than malt beverages or wine, as measured by said business's gross sales tax receipts. 
(3)	The retail licensee may be a corporation organized under the laws of the state, provided that the corporation is in good standing as evidenced by a current certificate of status issued by the secretary of state, and, further, with the exception of vintner licensees organized under the corporate form who operate wine tasting rooms on premises, the corporation must have owned or operated the place of business within the county, from which malt beverages and wine will be sold, for a period of 30 days or more prior to filing an application for license and at least 50 percent of the gross weekly sales generated by the corporate licensee's business for which a retail malt beverage and wine license is granted must originate from the sale of all products other than malt beverages or wine, as measured by said business's gross sales tax receipts. 
(4)	The licensee shall not have been convicted within seven years of the date of application of any felony, or any other violation of the laws of the state, or any other state, relating to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)	The licensee shall be responsible for the daily management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(6)	The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to subsections (1) through (5) of this section and shall place same on file with the clerk of the county commissioner before any license is issued. 
(7)	If the application is for a partnership or submitted on behalf of a partnership, all members of the partnership who own or operate the retail establishment in which malt beverages are to be sold must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications in the manner cited in subsection (6) of this section. 
(8)	No person or entity shall be granted a license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the county commissioner that such person or entity has a qualified location for the retail sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § II; Res. of 12-9-2002, § II) 
Sec. 4-21. - Effect of false statement or concealed facts in application. 
Any misstatement or concealment of facts in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable for prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § II; Res. of 12-9-2002, § II) 
Sec. 4-22. - Statement of gross sales tax receipts. 
(a)	At the time of application for renewal of a license issued pursuant to this article, the commissioner may require all licensees, except vintners operating wine tasting rooms on their licensed premises, to provide the county with the licensee's gross sales tax receipts for the preceding period of licensure. Should the licensee's gross sales tax receipts not reflect conformity with the requirements of this article, renewal of the license will be denied. 
(b)	Upon the request of the county commissioner, all licensees under this article, except vintners operating wine tasting rooms on premises, must provide, within a reasonable amount of time, records of their sales tax receipts to the county commissioner for inspection. Should said sales tax receipts not reflect conformity with this article, the retail license of such licensee may be suspended or revoked by the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § II; Res. of 12-9-2002, § II) 
Sec. 4-23. - Wholesale licenses. 
Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute malt beverages and wine at wholesale. Application shall be made with the clerk of the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § V; Res. of 12-9-2002, § V) 
Sec. 4-24. - Applications, renewals, notice and hearing. 
(a)	All applications for an original license or any renewal thereof shall be submitted in writing to the county commissioner or the clerk of the county commissioner. 
(b)	Each applicant shall state, under oath, that he has read this chapter, that he qualifies in all respects for a license issued hereunder, and that he shall abide by the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
(c)	The application shall be accompanied with a detailed description of the proposed location of the business regulated hereunder. 
(d)	In all cases, except renewals, the application shall be accompanied with a complete set of fingerprints as provided by law. The license shall not be issued if a record check reveals a violation prohibited by the qualification requirements of this chapter. 
(e)	The application shall be signed by the applicant under oath before an officer authorized to administer oaths in the state. 
(f)	All corporate applications shall be submitted by the officers authorized by the corporation as the applicant on behalf of such corporation and the authorized officer shall comply with all application requirements provided herein. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VII) 
Sec. 4-25. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)	All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking a license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or personally delivered to the applicant. 
(b)	If approved, the license shall be issued by the clerk of the county commissioner upon payment of the required license fee. 
(c)	Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the county commissioner regarding a license may, within ten days from the date of such decision, request a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Upon a timely request, a hearing shall be held within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date of the request for a hearing. Based on such evidence as may be presented upon a hearing, the county commissioner may affirm, reverse, or modify the prior decision. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VII) 
Sec. 4-26. - Term of licenses. 
(a)	Licenses issued under the terms of this article for sale of malt beverages and wine off the premises shall be renewed annually on or before November 15 of each year and shall expire on November 15 of each year. 
(b)	Licenses issued under the terms of this article for the sale of malt beverages and wine on the premises, except licenses issued to nonprofit corporations, shall be renewed annually on or before November 15 of each year and shall expire on November 15 of each year. 
(c)	Licenses issued to nonprofit corporations under the terms of this article for the sale of malt beverages and wine on the premises issued, shall be renewed annually on or before November 15 of each year and shall expire on November 15 of each year. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VIII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VIII) 
Sec. 4-27. - License fees. 
(a)	License fees shall be as established from time to time by the county commissioner and set forth in the county's fee schedule. 
(b)	Should a license be revoked for a violation of any provision of this article or federal or state law, the unearned portion of such license fee shall be forfeited by the licensee. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VIII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VIII) 
Sec. 4-28. - Excise taxes. 
In addition to the retail license fee cited in section 4-27, there is hereby assessed a pro-rated license fee, based on sales, in the following amounts: 

 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VIII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VIII) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; local excise taxes on win, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-29. - Stamps required to be affixed. 
No retail licensees of the county shall accept delivery of malt beverages and wine from any wholesale dealer unless the proper stamps are affixed to all containers as required by applicable ordinance or law. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § VIII; Res. of 12-9-2002, § VIII) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-8; possession, sale, or purchase of distilled spirits for which taxes not paid, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-29. 
Sec. 4-30. - Hours of operation. 
(a)	The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(b)	The hours of operation of wholesale licensees for the distribution of malt beverages and wine within the county shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. There shall be no malt beverages or wine sold or distributed in the county on Sundays, Christmas Day, or any other days prohibited by state law. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § IX; Res. of 12-9-2002, § IX) 
Secs. 4-31—4-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALE FOR CONSUMPTION OFF PREMISES 

Sec. 4-49. - Type of sale. 
Malt beverages and wine sold pursuant to this division will be for off-premises consumption only. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § I; Res. of 12-9-2002, § I) 
State Law reference— Allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 4-50. - Qualified location. 
(a)	A licensee may conduct the retail sale of malt beverages and wine only at a qualified location within the county. In order to be qualified, no location may be within 500 feet of any church building, funeral home, school building, educational building on a college campus. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground, and shall measure from the property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this division to the property line of the tract on which is located the church building, funeral home, school building, or an educational building on a college campus. 
(c)	The measurement of distance as contemplated in this section shall be the closest point of the property line a qualified business is located on to the closest point of the property line of any church building, funeral home, school building, or an educational building on a college campus. 
(Res. of 5-6-1985, § III; Res. of 12-9-2002, § III) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Secs. 4-51—4-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALE FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 4-74. - Type of sale. 
Malt beverages and wine sold under license issued by the authority of this division shall be for on-the-premises consumption only. 
(Res. of 3-8-1993, § I) 
Sec. 4-75. - Licensee qualifications. 
The licensee must meet the following qualifications: 
(1)	The licensee must be a restaurant organized under the laws of the state that: 
a.	Has been in existence for at least 30 days prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; 
b.	Has a seating capacity for at least 35 customers, and 75 percent of its income must be from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; 
c.	The licensee shall designate no less than two employees who shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted, and who shall not have been convicted within four years of the date of the application of a felony, or any violation of the laws of the state, or any other state, relating to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)	The applicant shall make a sworn statement of its qualifications according to the subsection (1) of this section and shall place the same on file with the county commissioner before any license shall be issued. In addition, the county commissioner may require the filing by the applicant of a copy of its articles of incorporation issued by the secretary of state; determination letter; charter, or other documentary evidence showing that such business is organized under the laws of the state and has been in business for at least 30 days. 
(3)	No business shall be issued a license hereunder unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the county commissioner that such business has a qualified location for the retail sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, as stated in section 4-76. 
(Res. of 3-8-1993, § II; Amdt. of 10-17-2013) 
Sec. 4-76. - Qualified location. 
(a)	A licensee may conduct the business of retail sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises only at a qualified location within the unincorporated limits of the county. In order to be qualified such location shall not be within 100 yards of any church building, funeral home, school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall measure from the property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this resolution to the property line of the tract on which is located a church building, funeral home, school building, school ground or college campus. 
(Res. of 3-8-1993, § III) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-77. - Possession of alcoholic beverage on licensed premises prohibited. 
No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail and for consumption on the premises or any agent or employee of the licensee, shall allow beer or wine to be taken off the licensed premises. 
(Res. of 3-8-1993, § V) 
Sec. 4-78. - Licenses nontransferable. 
Any license issued under this article shall not be transferable from one business to another nor shall any license be transferable from the location stated in the application, to another location without the prior written approval of the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 3-8-1993, § VIII) 
Secs. 4-79—4-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALE FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 4-100. - Type of sale. 
Malt beverages and wine sold under a license issued by the authority hereof shall be for on-the-premises consumption only. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § I) 
Sec. 4-101. - Licensee qualifications. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of the organization as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the organization and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	The licensee must be a bona fide nonprofit organization, the same being defined as any nonprofit organization organized under the laws of the state that: 
(1)	Has been in existence for at least 30 days prior to the filling of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this division; 
(2)	Has at least 50 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)	Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)	Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § II) 
Sec. 4-102. - Designation of management personnel required. 
The licensee shall designate no less than two members who shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted, and who shall not have been convicted of a felony within four years of the date of the application, or any violation of the laws of the state, or any other state, relating to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § II) 
Sec. 4-103. - Sworn statement of qualifications. 
The applicant shall make a sworn statement of its qualifications according to sections 4-101 and 4-102 and shall place the same on file with the county commissioner before any license shall be issued. In addition, the county commissioner may require the filing by the applicant of a copy of its Articles of Incorporation issued by the Secretary of State; IRS nonprofit determination letter; charter, or other documentary evidence showing that such organization is a nonprofit organization organized under the laws of the state. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § II) 
Sec. 4-104. - Qualified location. 
(a)	A licensee may conduct the business of retail sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises only at a qualified location within the unincorporated limits of the county. In order to be qualified, such location shall not be within 100 yards of any church building, funeral home, school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall measure from the property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this article to the property line of the tract on which is located a church building, funeral home, school building, school ground or college campus. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § III) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-105. - No alcoholic beverages permitted outside licensed premises. 
No nonprofit establishment licensed under this division authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail and for consumption on the premises or any agent or employee of the licensee, shall allow beer or wine to be taken outdoors or off the licensed premises. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § V) 
Sec. 4-106. - Restriction on sale of certain merchandise. 
No nonprofit establishment licensed under this division authorizing the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail and for consumption on the premises or any agent or employee of the licensee, shall allow beer or wine to be taken outdoors or off the licensed premises. 
(Res. of 2-14-1985, § V) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; prohibited adult conduct on premises licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.; coin operated amusement devices, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed; provided, however, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests, reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the person designated from time to time by the county commissioner to administer the provisions of this article. 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale for display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)	Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; 
(2)	Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)	Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is licensed or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing, or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commissions, hires, rewards for profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means that a person has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Massage parlor means an establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Parcel and parcel of land mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities includes any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: 
a.	Anilingus; 
b.	Buggery; 
c.	Coprophasy; 
d.	Coprophilia; 
e.	Piquerism; 
f.	Sapphism; 
g.	Zooerasty; 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)	Torture; 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented beating or the inflection of pain; or 
(8)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Sec. 6-21. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)	In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. However, no suspension shall take effect until written notice of the violations has been provided to the applicant-licensee not less than 48 hours prior to the time of the hearing for the county commissioner. If the evidence for the county commissioner shall demonstrate a violation likely to continue which poses an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of any citizen, then it shall be grounds for an immediate suspension of the license pending a full administrative hearing on the issue. 
(c)	Regardless of whether immediate suspension of the license has been imposed, in the event of any violation of this article, the county staff shall provide written notice of the nature of the violation to the applicant-licensee not less than ten days prior to the hearing before the county commissioner. 
(d)	At the time set for hearing, the county commissioner shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from the county staff, from interested parties, and from the licensee. The county commissioner shall make findings of fact as to whether or not the alleged violation of the article has occurred. 
(e)	The enumerated periods of mandatory minimum suspension shall be imposed and enforced for each violation determined by the county commissioner as follows: 

 
Secs. 6-22—6-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-46. - Required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the county, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, without a license. No license so issued shall condone or make legal an activity there under if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, massage parlor, modeling studio, adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which licensee shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
Sec. 6-47. - Prohibited licensees. 
No license shall be issued under this article to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes, including property taxes, for a business at that location. 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)	Any corporation, whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued share of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)	Any partnership or association, whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the federal, state, or local law. 
Sec. 6-48. - Limitation on aggregate number of licenses. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young vs . American Mini Theaters. Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 70-71, 96 S. Ct. 2440, 49 L. Ed. 2d 310 (1976). 
Sec. 6-49. - Application for license; fees. 
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the administrator or his designated representative. 
(b)	Prior to submission of the application for licensure, the applicant shall pay to the county clerk a nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount established by resolution of the county commissioner to defray, in part, the costs of investigation and report required by this article. 
(c)	The clerk shall issue a receipt showing that the application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the administrator at the time the application is submitted. 
(d)	The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 6-50. - Contents of application. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)	The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)	The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(5)	Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(6)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(7)	Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the share of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)	The business license history of the applicant and whether the applicant, in previous operations in this or any other county, state or territory under license, has had the license or license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)	All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the date and places of any of the convictions. 
(10)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. The applicant corporation shall designate one of its officers to act as its responsible managing officer. The designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)	If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the court clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant partnership shall designate one of its general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. The designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(12)	The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(13)	The other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(14)	The age, date of birth, and social security number of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the share of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(15)	Fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on the forms. 
(18)	Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)	Whether the premises are owned or rented and if applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copy of those documents giving the legal right. 
(20)	A certified plat by a registered surveyor or engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site, or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.	The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
b.	The manager or general partner, if by a partnership; 
c.	By the president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
d.	The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
Sec. 6-51. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the county and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the county commissioner, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
Sec. 6-52. - Investigation. 
The county shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. 
Sec. 6-53. - Grant of license; findings. 
Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)	The required fee has been paid. 
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the offenses referenced in this subsection, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses referenced in this subsection, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
(6)	The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or license denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other county located in or out of the state prior to the date of application. 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of the business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to health, distance, dire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)	The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or licensed any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where the adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities, as defined herein, openly occur. 
(10)	On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)	The proposed premises is not located too close to any church, school, library, government building or site, or any other business restricted hereunder. 
(12)	That the grant of the license will not cause a violation of this or any other regulation of the county or any state or federal law. 
(13)	Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
Sec. 6-54. - Denial of license; appeal. 
If the county, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the county clerk and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the clerk. The clerk shall, within ten days thereafter, notify the applicant by certified mail of the denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal the denial to the county commissioner. 
Sec. 6-55. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided, that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the county commissioner. 
Sec. 6-56. - Licenses nontransferable. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any the sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and the license shall thereafter be null and void except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)	As an exception to subsection (a) of this section, if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of the license, and in that case the license, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. 
(c)	An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
Secs. 6-57—6-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 

Sec. 6-86. - Notice of appeal. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the county commissioner and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the county commissioner, and the name of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular county commissioner meeting occurring not less than five, and no more than 30 days after receipt of the application for the county commissioner action. 
Sec. 6-87. - Discretion of county commissioner regarding appeal procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the county commissioner agenda, the county commissioner may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give the notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
Sec. 6-88. - Notice of hearing. 
The clerk shall be responsible for the publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
Sec. 6-89. - Conduct of hearing before county commissioner. 
Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the county commissioner, at the time and date set therefor, the county commissioner shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from county staff. The county commissioner may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the county commissioner shall be final. 
Sec. 6-90. - Conduct of hearing before hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
Sec. 6-91. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The county commissioner and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
Sec. 6-92. - Report of hearing officer; notice of hearing. 
(a)	If a hearing officer has been appointed to hear the appeal, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date the hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the county commissioner. 
(b)	The report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. 
(c)	All reports shall be filed with the county clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of the report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee the same day as it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished to the administrator and county sheriff's department. 
(d)	The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular county commissioner meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee of the date of the meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
Sec. 6-93. - Review of report by county commissioner; determination. 
The county commissioner may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the county commissioner does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of the cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
Secs. 6-94—6-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 6-115. - Proximity to other facilities. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential purposes; 
(2)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, nursing home or playground is located; 
(3)	Within 600 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)	On a tract of land containing less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
Sec. 6-116. - Measurement of distances. 
For the purposes of this article, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
Sec. 6-117. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the county commissioner, has been deposited with the county, and approval has been obtained from the administrator and the building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the county's codes, have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified in his license and at the location specified for that name. 
(c)	Any application for any extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
Secs. 6-118—6-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-148. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplied on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to license thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be allowed to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections license. 
Sec. 6-149. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspection of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
Sec. 6-150. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
Sec. 6-151. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a quasi-criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operation, conduction or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 6-152. - Underage persons. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract as a dancer with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed as provided herein. No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 6-153. - Display of license. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
Secs. 6-154—6-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-175. - Qualifications. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Convicted includes an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms employed on the licensed premises and work on any licensed premises shall include as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licenses premises. 
(b)	Age requirements. Employees of an adult business establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. 
(c)	Character requirement. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. 
(d)	Convictions. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult business establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 6-176. - County approval required. 
(a)	Before any person may work on licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the administrator of his intended employment on forms supplied by the administrator and shall receive approval of such employment from the administrator. 
(b)	The prospective employee shall supply such information, as the administrator requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular state crime information center forms. 
(c)	Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. 
(d)	If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, apply to the administrator for a hearing. 
(e)	After the hearing, the decision of the administrator may be appealed to the county commissioner that may issue such order as is proper in the premises. 
(f)	An investigation fee, as set by the county commissioner from time to time, shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
Sec. 6-177. - Independent contractors. 
For the purpose of this division, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Secs. 6-178—6-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EROTIC DANCE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-208. - Applicability. 
The regulations of this division shall apply to erotic dance establishments in addition to all other requirements of this article. 
Sec. 6-209. - Advertising prohibited. 
No person or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 6-210. - Hours of operation. 
An erotic dance establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday, on Sunday and on December 25 of each year. 
Sec. 6-211. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
Sec. 6-212. - Minimum lighting requirements. 
All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
Sec. 6-213. - Records retention; report of receipts and payments. 
(a)	No later than March 1 of each year an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the administrator showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(b)	An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers and all other employees of the establishment. 
Sec. 6-214. - Performance restrictions. 
(a)	All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for the purpose, which is raised at least two feet from the level of the first floor. 
(b)	No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(c)	No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(d)	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(e)	No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the position of animal control and rabies officers; to establish regulations for animals in order to protect the public health and welfare; to comply with provisions of state law; to provide for enforcement and penalties; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 2) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive dog means a dog that trespasses upon the property of another and that exhibits aggressive behavior toward a human being, without provocation, which behavior places a person in fear for his well-being or safety. 
Animal means all domesticated dogs, cats, and ferrets, male and female, singular and plural, actually in, or intended to be in, the custody and control of an owner, but not including any wild animal or horse, goat, pig, fowl, or any livestock. 
Animal control officer means any county officer, agent or employee designated by the county to perform the duties of an animal control officer pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c). 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, kennel, animal exhibition or animal shelter, except veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture under the provisions of 7 USC 2131 et seq. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the governing authority for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals. 
Board of health means the county board of health. 
Certificate of vaccination means a certificate of vaccination on a form approved by the CDC and the Georgia Department of Human Resources and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
Certificate of registration means a form issued to declare a dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. 
Dangerous dog, subject to the exemptions in section 8-55, means any dog that according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)	Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property. 
(2)	Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dog means any member of the canine family 
Guard dog means any dog that has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal approval command and any dog that, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Kennel means an establishment for the purpose of breeding, selling or boarding dogs or cats or engaging in the training of dogs or cats. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust who or which own, possesses, keeps, or has custody or control of an animal within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. 
Potentially dangerous dog, subject to the exemptions in section 8-107 means any dog that without provocation bites a human being on public or private property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Rabies control officer means an officer appointed by the county board of health to perform the duties of a rabies control officer. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records of an animal control officer. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Vaccine means any anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of human resources. 
Vaccinate or inoculate means the injection of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into an animal. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 3) 
Secs. 8-3—8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-23. - Animal control unit created. 
There is created for the county an animal control unit for regulations of dangerous dog animal control and rabies, and it shall be staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(1)) 
Sec. 8-24. - Joint animal control services authorized. 
The county shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with one or more other governing authorities to provide joint animal control services pursuant to the provisions of this article as provided by state law. Likewise, the county shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with nongovernmental entities to provide joint animal control services pursuant to the provisions of this article as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(1)) 
Sec. 8-25. - Authority of animal control officer; cooperation of law enforcement agencies. 
An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. All law enforcement agencies of the county shall cooperate with the animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(2)) 
Sec. 8-26. - Interfering with animal control unit and officers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful: 
(1)	To interfere with or fail to cooperate with the animal control officer or other officer acting pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)	To take or attempt to take any animal from a county vehicle used to transport an animal pursuant to this chapter; or 
(3)	To take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or other impounding area used by the animal control unit for the purposes of this chapter without lawful authority. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(3)) 
Sec. 8-27. - Authority for destruction of animal posing immediate threat. 
The animal control officer may destroy any animal which presents a threat of immediate harm to public health or safety or other innocent animals and which cannot be taken for impoundment without threat of serious harm to the animal control officer or his agents. The destruction shall be in the most humane method available to the officer on scene. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(4)) 
Sec. 8-28. - Issuance of citations. 
Upon information known to, or a complaint lodged with, any officer or member of the animal control unit, or a law enforcement agency employee of the county that any owner or possessor of an animal is in violation of this chapter, the animal control officer or rabies control officer or any law enforcement officer may, after investigation, issue a summons requiring the owner or possessor of such animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate's court of the county on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 13) 
Secs. 8-29—8-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL 

Sec. 8-60. - Duty of owner to exercise care. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of an animal or livestock within the county to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people and property from injuries and damage that might result from the animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. Every animal shall be restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from chasing vehicles or chasing menacing or attacking persons or other animals. Citation under this section shall not replace or be a substitute for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter dealing with dangerous or potentially dangerous or vicious animals, and an owner may be subject to enforcement under both sections. 
(b)	Violations of this section shall be enforceable in the county's magistrate court and shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 8-61. - Removal of tracking or identification devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any tracking collar or identification from any animal other than the person's own animal. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Secs. 8-62—8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8-81. - Vaccination required. 
Every owner of a dog, cat, or ferret shall cause the dog, cat, or ferret to be vaccinated against rabies, the first or primary vaccination to occur at no later than three months of age, followed by revaccination on an annual or triennial, in accordance with Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and Control or as described on the individual vaccine label. If a previously vaccinated animal is overdue for a booster, it should be revaccinated with a single dose of vaccine. Immediately following the booster, the animal is considered currently vaccinated and should be placed on a schedule depending on the labeled duration of the vaccine used. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Sec. 8-82. - Certificates of vaccination. 
Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a certificate of vaccination, furnished by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. The owner shall retain a copy of the certificate. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Sec. 8-83. - Rabies clinics. 
Any animal clinic within the county that provides rabies vaccination services must notify the county board of health of its intent to operate a rabies clinic not less than 15 days prior to commencing such operation. In emergencies or during quarantine the 15 days notice prior to the operation of a clinic shall not apply. Rabies vaccinations must be performed by a licensed veterinarian. Payment for such services shall be derived from vaccination fees charged to and paid by the animal owner or caretaker. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5(1)) 
Sec. 8-84. - Rabies control officer; appointment and duties. 
A rabies control officer will be appointed by the county board of health. The rabies control officer shall: 
(1)	Investigate and maintain a record of animal bites in the county. 
(2)	Ensure proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite or, if the animal is dead or killed, preparation and submission of the head for laboratory examination. 
(3)	Ensure proper disposition of animals exposed to known rabid animals. 
(4)	Assist in county-sponsored rabies vaccination clinics. 
(5)	Perform such other duties as provided in this chapter or from time to time by the sole commissioner or the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5(2)) 
Sec. 8-85. - Confinement of certain animals required. 
(a)	A dog or other animal, regardless of whether vaccinated, that has bitten a person or other animal shall be confined within the county for a period of ten days following the date of the bite except where conditions for confinement in an area outside the limits of the county meet the confinement requirements of this article, county board of health rules and regulations, and state law. 
(b)	A dog or other animal, regardless of whether vaccinated, having signs suggestive of rabies shall be confined and in isolation until its death or until its freedom from suspicion of having rabies is established. 
(c)	A dog or animal not vaccinated and bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, placed in strict isolation in an approved kennel for not less than six months at the owner's expense. 
(d)	Any dog or other animal, the rabies vaccination of which is current as evidenced by the certificate of vaccination, that is bitten by a known rabid animal, may be revaccinated, then confined in an approved manner for not less than 30 days and thereafter released if no signs of rabies are present. 
(e)	Every dog or other animal, regardless of whether vaccinated, confined pursuant to this section shall be kept confined and isolated during the entire quarantine period. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5(3.a.1—5)) 
Sec. 8-86. - Confinement area or facility standards. 
The rabies control officer shall approve all confinement areas or facilities, ensuring that the confinement area is safe and secure, that it provides for isolation of the animal from all other animals and humans and that the area is clean and humane, providing adequate food, water, and exercise, and appropriate temperature and shelter from the elements to the animal. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Sec. 8-87. - Duty to report animal bites and suspected rabies infections. 
(a)	The owner or custodian of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the health board and the rabies control officer, reporting any information regarding persons bitten or attacked by said animal. 
(b)	Any person bitten by an animal reasonably suspected of being rabid shall immediately notify the health board and the rabies control officer. 
(c)	Any person within the jurisdiction of the county who is aware of any animal bite inflicted upon a human by any animal shall immediately report the bite to the animal control officer, the rabies control officer, or a public health official pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Sec. 8-88. - Redemption of animals impounded for lack of proof of vaccination. 
Any vaccinated dog impounded because of a lack of proof of vaccination may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing proof of rabies vaccination. Any unvaccinated dog or other animal impounded because of lack of proof of vaccination may be reclaimed by its owner by giving satisfactory assurances of compliance with the rabies vaccination requirement of this article within 72 hours of release. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5(3.a.6)) 
Sec. 8-89. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
Any animal not redeemed within 72 hours after the owner is notified of clearance for release from quarantine or other confinement may be disposed of by euthanasia. Animals confined pursuant to this article with no registration or known owner, may be destroyed after ten days. The owner of the hospital or shelter is made an agent of the county for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are declared to be for a governmental purpose. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 7) 
Secs. 8-90—8-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-107. - Exemptions from dangerous and potentially dangerous classification. 
The terms "dangerous dog" and "potentially dangerous dog," as defined in this chapter, shall not include: 
(1)	A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)	A dog who inflicts an injury if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 4) 
Sec. 8-108. - Jurisdiction of probate court; investigation of aggressive dog behavior. 
If a dog acts as an aggressive dog, as defined in this chapter, that conduct may be referred to the probate judge for investigation by law enforcement. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 5) 
Secs. 8-109—8-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 8-130. - Investigations. 
The animal control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the jurisdiction of the county from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer or county board of health, shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or reclassified as a dangerous dog if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 8(1)) 
Sec. 8-131. - Classification as dangerous or potentially dangerous; notice to owner. 
Should the animal control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall classify such dog accordingly. The animal control officer shall then notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 8(2)) 
Sec. 8-132. - Form and contents of notice to owner. 
The notice to the owner shall: 
(1)	Be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address; 
(2)	Include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	Be dated and state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)	State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the county board of health; 
(5)	State that if a hearing is not requested, an animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)	Include a form to request a hearing before the board of health and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 8(2a)—(f)) 
Sec. 8-133. - Hearing. 
(a)	When the board of health receives a request for a hearing under the provisions of this article it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. 
(b)	The board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 8(3)) 
Sec. 8-134. - Determination; notice to owner. 
Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the board of health shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 8(4)) 
Secs. 8-135—8-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POSSESSION RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 8-152. - Certificate of registration required. 
(a)	No one shall have, own or possess within the jurisdiction of the county a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration. 
(b)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves to this county from any other county within the state shall register such dog as required by this article within ten days after becoming a resident of the county. 
(c)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register such dog as required by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident of the state and the county. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 9(1), (6), (7)) 
Sec. 8-153. - Requirements for issuance of certificate. 
The animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(2)	The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall receive such sign from the animal control officer at the time the owner pays the annual registration fee in the amount established by the sole commissioner; and 
(3)	A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $25,000.00 issued by the insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(4)	A surety bond in the amount of $25,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 9(2), (3)) 
Sec. 8-154. - Fees; certificate renewal. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee in the amount at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. Certificates of registration shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. The annual registration fee or renewal fee may be changed from time to time by the sole commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 9(4)) 
Sec. 8-155. - Notice of owner's intent to move from the county 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the county. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 9(5)) 
Sec. 8-156. - Duty of owner to give notice of loose, unconfined, sold or donated dog. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 9(8)) 
Sec. 8-157. - Dogs outside proper enclosure prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure as defined in this ordinance unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person, but not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside unless restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 10) 
Sec. 8-158. - Grounds for confiscation of dangerous dogs. 
(a)	A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if: 
(1)	The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required under the provisions of this article; 
(2)	The dog is not validly registered as required in this article; or 
(3)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure or is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(b)	A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if: 
(1)	The dog is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(2)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as defined in this article; or 
(3)	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure or is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 11(1), (2)) 
Sec. 8-159. - Redemption from confiscation. 
Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this article shall be returned to its owner upon compliance with the provisions herein as determined by the animal control officer and upon payment of reasonable confiscation fees. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog is confiscated, the dog may be destroyed. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 11(3)) 
Sec. 8-160. - Right of entry. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to enter either public or private property when accompanied by certified law enforcement officer to impound any animal if the officer has reasonable cause to believe the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is in violation of this article. The animal control officer may, if applicable, in lieu of impoundment, issue a summons for violations. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 12(5)) 
Sec. 8-161. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the provisions of this article or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under the provisions of this article shall be guilty pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(a) of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and shall be guilty pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(b) of a misdemeanor, both in addition to the penalties imposed by state law. 
(b)	If the owner of a dangerous dog who has a previous conviction for a violation of this article knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article, and if the owner's dangerous dog attacks and bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article, such owner shall be guilty pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(c) of a felony. 
(c)	The owner of a dangerous dog who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article , and whose dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this article shall be guilty pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(d) of a felony. 
(d)	In addition to the penalties for violations as described in this section, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the animal control officer and placed in quarantine for ten days as per the policy of the county board of health, and thereafter, the dangerous dog may be destroyed in an expeditious manner. 
(e)	No owner of a dangerous dog who has complied with the requirements in this article shall be held criminally liable under state law for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's property pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(f). 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 14) 
Sec. 8-162. - Liability for damages. 
It is the intent of this article that the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the county or any county employee or official which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted: 
(1)	By a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(2)	By a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	By a dog that the county has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)	By a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this article; or 
(5)	By a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(2), § 15) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; standards and requirements for construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; county building, electrical, and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; local government code enforcement boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
DWV means drain, waste, and vent piping and materials associated with building drain and venting systems, as further defined and delineated in the plumbing code adopted by the county. 
SEER means seasonal energy efficiency ratio as defined by the Air Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI), Arlington, Virginia. 
Sec. 10-2. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person or agent, who shall violate any provision of the technical codes, or any portion of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable as set forth in section 1-11. Each person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continue. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 7; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 5) 
Secs. 10-3—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM STANDARDS CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-21. - Adoption of technical codes. 
The following state minimum standards codes, as adopted and amended, now or in the future, by the state department of community affairs, along with the referenced appendices, are adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein: 
(1)	International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007), and including Appendices C, D, and J. 
(2)	International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007-2008). 
(3)	International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007), and including Appendix D. 
(4)	International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007-2008) and 2007 Errata for Georgia Amendments. 
(5)	International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007-2008). 
(6)	National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2006). 
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code, 2007 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2008). 
(8)	International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition. 
(9)	International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(10)	International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(1); Ord. of 2-21-2008(1), §§ 1—8) 
State Law reference— Adoption of state minimum standards code by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-28; county adoption of national and regional codes by reference, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-3. 
Sec. 10-22. - Code remedial. 
The technical codes adopted herein are remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof (public safety, health, and general welfare) through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.2) 
Sec. 10-23. - Quality control and warranty excluded. 
(a)	Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this article except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(b)	The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The county, county employees, and construction board of adjustment and appeals board members shall not be liable in torts for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.2) 
Sec. 10-24. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)	Building code. The provisions of the building code adopted herein shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(b)	Electrical code. The provisions of the electrical code adopted herein shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(c)	Fuel gas code. The provisions of the fuel gas code adopted herein shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(d)	Mechanical code. The provisions of the mechanical code adopted herein shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(e)	Plumbing code. The provisions of the plumbing code adopted herein shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(f)	Fire code. The provisions of the fire code adopted herein shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(g)	Energy conservation. The provisions of the energy conservation code adopted herein shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(h)	Residential code. The provisions of the residential code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(i)	Property maintenance code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.3) 
Sec. 10-25. - Conflicting provisions. 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.3) 
Sec. 10-26. - No abrogation of federal and state authority. 
The provisions of the technical codes adopted herein shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the technical codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.3) 
Sec. 10-27. - Appendices and referenced standards. 
(a)	Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(b)	Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.3) 
Sec. 10-28. - Building maintenance subject to code standards. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards that are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.3) 
Secs. 10-29—10-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCEPTIONS AND ADDITIONS TO TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 10-60. - Exceptions regarding existing buildings. 
(a)	Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. If such work exceeds 50 percent of market value of the building then said building shall be brought to current codes. 
(b)	If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.5) 
Sec. 10-61. - Exceptions regarding special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.6) 
Sec. 10-62. - Requirements not covered by technical codes. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the building code or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.6) 
Sec. 10-63. - Alternate materials and methods permitted. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.7) 
Sec. 10-64. - Exception for height restrictions. 
(a)	Regardless of any provision of the technical codes adopted herein to the contrary, there shall be no buildings permitted or constructed within the unincorporated areas of the county that exceed a height of three stories or a total height of 35 feet, whichever is less. This restriction on building height shall include all residential, nonresidential, commercial, multifamily, apartment, condominium, or any other structure or improvements permitted to real property within the county. The height of a single-family dwelling structure shall be determined by measuring from the point of the highest eave of the structure down to the highest point at which the foundation of such structure intersects the ground. 
(b)	Regardless of any provision of the technical codes adopted herein to the contrary, the height of a structure used for commercial purposes or as a multifamily dwelling, including, but not limited to, townhouses, apartments, and condominiums, shall be determined by measuring from the highest point of the utmost portion of the crest, summit, or ridge top of the structure down to the footing. The walls placed upon the footing, including, but not limited to, poured concrete walls, block walls, or any wall consisting of any other type of construction material shall be considered a portion of that structure to be included in the height limitation. 
(c)	This height restriction shall not apply to water, radio, and television towers. Further, this restriction shall not prohibit chimneys, flagpoles, flues, steeples, belfries, cupolas, antenna or windmills which may extend from the top of a structure or exceed 35 feet as a single structure. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(1)) 
Sec. 10-65. - Exception for unsafe buildings or systems. 
Regardless of any provision of the technical codes adopted herein to the contrary, all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems that are unsafe or unsanitary, that do not provide adequate egress, that constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.5) 
Sec. 10-66. - Rough sawn lumber permitted for certain construction. 
In the construction of personal residences or additions thereto, the use of rough sawn lumber is permitted as an exception to the county's technical codes. 
(Amd. of 2-15-2007(1)) 
Secs. 10-67—10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SETBACKS 

Sec. 10-91. - General requirements. 
(a)	Regardless of any provisions of the adopted technical codes to the contrary, no building, structure or other improvements that constitute an enclosed or sheltered area or a swimming pool may be constructed within 20 feet to the back line of a lot or tract of land, within ten feet of any side line or within 20 feet of any front line. 
(b)	The front line shall be that portion of the lot or tract of land that joins a public or private street or right-of-way, which may be used for parking. 
(c)	In the event a lot or tract of land is platted to the center or edge of a road, said setbacks shall be measured from the right-of-way of the road. If a lot or tract of land does not front a road or if a lot or tract of land adjoins a road at more than one line, then the front line shall be designated by the landowner; thereafter, all other lines are designated in the proper relation and designation to the front line. 
(d)	Exempted from these setback requirements are the installation of landscaping and other improvements that do not constitute a dwelling or enclosed structures. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 10-92. - Lake front properties. 
(a)	Regardless of any provision of the adopted technical codes to the contrary, homes or buildings may not be constructed on any lot or tract of land within 50 feet of the 1926-foot elevation above mean sea level of Lake Chatuge. This 50-foot setback is not a horizontal offset, but it is to be measured 50 feet back perpendicular from the 1926-foot contour with the topography (slope) of the land, said 1926-foot elevation being the full pool level of said Tennessee Valley Authority impoundment. 
(b)	This setback requirement shall not be construed to limit boat docks, decks, walkways or other marina related construction as normally permitted by the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 10-93. - Exceptions to requirements. 
(a)	Lots of record that were of record with the Clerk of Superior Court of the county before February 21, 2008, are exempt from the minimum dimensional requirements of this division. Said exemption shall be applicable to both the owner of record at the time of recording of said lot and all subsequent owners of record. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to buildings or other improvements that were in existence on February 21, 2008, or to lots that are subject to a current valid building permit on February 21, 2008. These buildings may be replaced with new buildings within the setback buffers, provided they are constructed on the same footprint of the building being replaced. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 3) 
Sec. 10-94. - Variances. 
Variance applications seeking variance from the setback requirements set forth in this chapter will be heard by the county commissioner who may appoint an advisory committee to review plans submitted for water filtration by porous surfaces. The standard for review of variances to setbacks shall include the following questions: 
(1)	Was the lot or tract of land platted of record prior to the enactment of the county building code and/or the first amendment of same? 
(2)	Was the lot recorded before the present lot size requirement making it too small to construct a building behind a 50-foot setback? 
(3)	Does the setback application request for a variance include sufficient buffer vegetation or other buffer landscaping approved by an engineer or commissioner's advisory committee to accomplish the intent of the setback to establish a porous surface to filter stormwater and/or runoff water discharge into Lake Chatuge? 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 4) 
Secs. 10-95—10-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 10-117. - Established; department head title and qualifications. 
The county has established a department called the building inspection department. The person in charge of the department shall be known as the building official. The qualifications for the building official and for other code enforcement personnel shall be as established by the county commissioner. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.4) 
Sec. 10-118. - Conflicts of interest prohibited. 
An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this article, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.4) 
Sec. 10-119. - Open records to be maintained. 
The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.4) 
Sec. 10-120. - Personnel not personally liable. 
Any department officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the county in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the county until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.4) 
Secs. 10-121—10-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 10-139. - Authority. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.1) 
Sec. 10-140. - Reports. 
The building official shall submit annually a report to the county commissioner covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 1.4) 
Sec. 10-141. - Right of entry. 
(a)	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. 
(b)	If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(c)	When the building official shall have first obtained an administrative warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.2) 
Sec. 10-142. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.3) 
Sec. 10-143. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)	Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)	Violation of Code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 2.4) 
Secs. 10-144—10-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 10-170. - Permit application. 
When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.1.1; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 10-171. - Exceptions to permit requirement. 
Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)	Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)	Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)	Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)	Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
(5)	Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)	Any portable evaporative cooler; and 
(7)	Any self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 lbs. (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.1.1; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 10-172. - Work authorized. 
A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. Normal repairs may be made. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), §§ 3.1.2, 3.1.3; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 10-173. - Information required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.1.4; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 10-174. - Approval of commissioner required for work on county right-of-way. 
Private work on a county right-of-way must have approval from the county commissioner. 
Sec. 10-175. - Approval of fire marshal required for certain occupancies. 
Certain types of occupancy will require plan approval of the fire marshal prior to issuance of a building permit. 
Sec. 10-176. - State and health department permits required. 
(a)	State issued land disturbance permit. All applications for commercial construction must be accompanied by a land disturbance (grading) permit issued by the state environmental protection division if disturbing over one acre. The site and building plans will be inspected by the building department and, if over one acre of land is to be disturbed, the soil and erosion plans will be inspected by the state environmental protection division. 
(b)	Septic permit or sewer tap-on approval. If the building is to be served by septic system a copy of the septic permit from the county health department must be furnished. If the building is to be served by sewer a letter from the provider, indicating tap-on is permitted. When the building plans are approved and information is furnished that the sewer or septic system is adequate for the proposed use the building permit may be issued. 
Sec. 10-177. - Requirements for permits for construction of exterior appurtenances. 
To obtain a building permit for exterior appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structures the following items are required: 
(1)	A sketch or drawing indicating the approximate square footage of the construction and the location of the proposed structure to the dwelling, including the location from the property line; and 
(2)	A copy of the approved septic tank permit or sewer tap-on approval. 
Sec. 10-178. - Additional requirements for commercial construction. 
To purchase a building permit for commercial building as part of new development, for single commercial buildings located on existing approved lots, and for commercial tenant finish, the following items are required: 
(1)	Two sets of site drawings containing at a minimum, complete site plan (dimensions of building, setback, etc.) and soil and erosion protection plan (silk fence, check dams, etc.); 
(2)	Two sets of building plans; and 
(3)	Land disturbing activity permit if more than one acre is to be disturbed. 
Sec. 10-179. - Time limitations. 
(a)	An application for construction or addition of improvements in accordance with this article shall be valid for one year following the date of issuance of the permit. 
(b)	The holder of a valid and current permit shall be entitled to extend the subject permit construction period for an additional one-year period at no cost so long as the extension is requested in writing prior to the expiration of the permit period and proof of a current and valid septic permit or sewerage connection permit is submitted with the request for extension. 
(c)	The holder of a valid and current permit may request and shall be entitled to a second and final one-year extension of the construction period at no cost so long as the extension is requested in writing prior to the expiration of the permit period, proof of a current and valid septic permit or sewerage connection permit is submitted with the request for extension and a minimum of one approved inspection is conducted during the last one-year extension period. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.1.5; Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 10-180. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)	Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)	Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)	Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)	All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)	Buildings and structures three stories. 
(3)	Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, are excepted from this requirement and shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)	Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)	Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.2) 
Sec. 10-181. - Additional requirements for hazardous occupancies. 
For permit applications for construction of facilities that are classified by the county as hazardous occupancies, the building official may require the following additional information: 
(1)	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.2) 
Sec. 10-182. - Examination of documents. 
(a)	Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)	Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.3) 
Sec. 10-183. - Issuing permits. 
(a)	Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)	Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal, when requested, shall be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)	Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without ensurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)	Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the county road department for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided in the technical codes adopted by the county. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.4) 
Sec. 10-184. - One-permit system for commercial construction. 
The county utilizes a one-permit system for commercial construction. With this system, the builder who purchases the permit is paying for all of the subcontractor permits at the same time. Each trade subcontractor must submit an affidavit to the building department prior to scheduling any inspections for that trade. 
Sec. 10-185. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.5) 
Sec. 10-186. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)	Generally; abandonment. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this chapter. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 12 months after issuance with regard to buildings and six months after issuance with regard to mobile homes unless an inspection is conducted within six months of the permit issuance, and a minimum of one approved inspection must be conducted within one year of the last inspection to keep the permit active. 
(b)	Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions that, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)	Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.6) 
Sec. 10-187. - Posting of permit required. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-188. - Penalty for commencing work without permit. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to the penalty set for in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.7.2) 
Secs. 10-189—10-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-215. - Existing buildings. 
Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-216. - Manufacturers and fabricators. 
When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-217. - Inspection service. 
The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this article. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided, that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-218. - Inspections prior to issuance of certificates. 
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-219. - Exceptions to inspection requirements and inspection fees. 
Outbuildings such as accessory buildings (e.g., garages, barns, hay sheds, and non-weight-bearing coverings, etc.) are exempt from building code inspection and will require an electrical inspection only if the electrical service entered the building; provided, however, that any such structure that covered a dwelling is not exempt from building code inspection but is exempt from building code inspection fees. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.4) 
Sec. 10-220. - Required. 
The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and as many inspections as necessary until the building official is satisfied that the technical codes have been met, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)	Building. 
a.	Foundation inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.	Frame inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)	Electrical. 
a.	Underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. All branch circuit wiring is in place for all receptacles and lighting outlets, all feeders pulled to panel. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)	Plumbing. (Note that required tests shall be as stated in the county's plumbing code.) 
a.	Underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, DWV and water tests are in place, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)	Mechanical. 
a.	Underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)	Gas. 
a.	Rough piping inspection is to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, test placed on piping and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.	Final piping inspection is to be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)	Energy. 
a.	Foundation inspection is to be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.	Frame inspection is to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.	Final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-221. - Written release required. 
Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-222. - Reinforcements to be inspected before being covered. 
Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Sec. 10-223. - Fire protection plaster not to be applied without release. 
In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.8) 
Secs. 10-224—10-254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 10-255. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 4) 
Sec. 10-256. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)	Required; inspections required for issuance. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(b)	Issuance. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law. 
(c)	Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may be safely occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(d)	Existing building certificate. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(e)	Requirements for issuance. To obtain a certificate of occupancy the following is required: 
(1)	Satisfactory completion of all required inspections; 
(2)	Payment of any outstanding fees; 
(3)	Installation of permanent and proper address numbers in accordance with the E-911 plan. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.9) 
Sec. 10-257. - Certificates of completion. 
(a)	Issuance; effect. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(c)	Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or acclimatization of sensitive materials system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(d)	Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize the disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.9) 
Sec. 10-258. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)	Occupancy restrictions. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)	Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)	Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.10) 
Secs. 10-259—10-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-280. - Appeals process. 
The builder and owner have the right to appeal any decision or disagreement on decisions made by the building department. Appeals shall be made in the following order: 
(1)	Construction board of adjustment and appeals; 
(2)	County commissioner; and 
(3)	Courts. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 10-281. - Appointment. 
The county has established the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The county commissioner shall appoint the board. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.1) 
Sec. 10-282. - Membership; qualifications. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.2) 
Sec. 10-283. - Terms; vacancies; removal from office for nonattendance. 
The terms of office of the members of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filed for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.2) 
Sec. 10-284. - Quorum and voting. 
A simple majority of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this chapter, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.2) 
Sec. 10-285. - Building official as secretary of board. 
The building official shall act as secretary of the construction board of adjustment and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.2) 
Sec. 10-286. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in this article, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.3) 
Sec. 10-287. - Rules and regulations; meetings. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairperson. The board shall meet within 15 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.5) 
Sec. 10-288. - Grounds for appeals. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)	The building official rejected or refused to approve any permit application or the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or the materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)	The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)	An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)	The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.4) 
Sec. 10-289. - Grounds and conditions for variances. 
(a)	Grounds for variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter or this technical code or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)	Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)	The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)	Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)	The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)	The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.4) 
Sec. 10-290. - Notice of appeal. 
(a)	Time for filing. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 15 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(b)	Authority to limit time for notice. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.4) 
Sec. 10-291. - Decisions of the board. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 5.5) 
Secs. 10-292—10-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FEES 

Sec. 10-316. - Permit and inspection fees. 
(a)	Required for issuance of permit. A permit shall not be issued until the required permit and inspection fees prescribed by the county have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)	Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit and inspection fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(c)	Schedule of permit and inspection fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit and any associated inspection fees shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the county commissioner. 
(d)	Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of the building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(e)	Reinspection fees. The county will collect reinspection fees for repeat inspections caused by failure of the inspection requested or not being ready for inspection or inspections not completed because of erosion control problems in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees. 
(f)	Method and time of payment. All building permit fees must be paid in cash or check at the time of issuance and any reinspection fees for any reason must be paid before a temporary or partial certificate of occupancy, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of completion is issued. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(3), § 3.7) 
Secs. 10-317—10-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 10-351. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Towns County, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 1) 
Sec. 10-352. - Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be 'doing business' subject to the requirements of this article if: 
(a)	He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(b)	He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term 'state of emergency' is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term 'subsequent recovery period' is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 2) 
Sec. 10-353. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Towns County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 3) 
Sec. 10-354. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at $0.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 1) 
Sec. 10-355. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 5) 
Sec. 10-356. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 6) 
Sec. 10-357. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 7) 
Sec. 10-358. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(1), § 8) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq.; professions and businesses generally, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.; county authority to impose business regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8(a); exclusion of certain veterans and blind persons from county regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; authority for imposition of punishment for failure to comply with regulatory fee ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; county authority to levy occupational taxes, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6(a), 48-13-7; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq.; issuance of local business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; investigation of business for issuance of county or municipal license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNLAWFUL ACTS 

Sec. 12-101. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Towns County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Towns County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(3), § 1) 
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Towns County. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(3), § 2) 
Sec. 12-103. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(3), § 3) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management generally, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency means the existence of conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of the county caused by natural disasters, riots, civil disturbances, or other situations presenting major law enforcement and other public safety problems, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision of the state and which require the combined forces of other political subdivisions of the state to combat. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-3, 36-69-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Multi-jurisdictional hazard mitigation plan. 
The county multi-jurisdictional hazard mitigation plan as reviewed by the state emergency management agency (GEMA) and submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for formal review and approval is adopted as if fully set forth herein and as it may be amended from time to time. A copy of the plan is available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 8-16-2007; Res. of 3-20-2014(2)) 
Sec. 14-3. - Suspension of code during emergency. 
(a)	Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)	Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Towns County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Towns County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Towns County. Such meetings may be called by the commissioner. 
(2)	Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)	Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Towns County, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.	The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
b.	Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.	Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(4)	Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)	Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any area while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Towns County Health Department and Towns County Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the Governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Towns County. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted in a particular district or area of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2012(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 14-4. - Program to charge mitigation rates for fire department service(s). 
(a)	Towns County shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of emergency and non-emergency services by it's fire rescue department for personnel, supplies, and equipment to the scene of emergency and non-emergency incidents as listed in "EXHIBIT A". The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the services and that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in "EXHIBIT A", which may include any services, personnel, supplies, and equipment with base lines established by addendum to this document. 
(b)	A claim shall be filed to the responsible party through their insurance carrier. In no case will the responsible party be billed directly. 
(c)	The sole commissioner may make rules or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke, or add rules and regulations, not consistent with this section, as may be necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these mitigation rates or collection thereof. 
(d)	It is found and determined that all formal actions by the sole commissioner concerning and relating to the adoption of this resolution were adopted in open meetings of the county commissioner, and that all deliberations of the county commissioner and any of his committees that resulted in such formal actions were in accordance with all legal requirements, and the codified resolutions of the county commissioner. 
EXHIBIT A 
MITIGATION RATES  BASED ON PER HOUR 
MOTOR VEHICLE INCIDENTS 
Level 1 - $435.00 
Provide hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization. This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time the fire department responds to an accident/incident. 
Level 2 - $495.00 
Includes level I services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire department has to clean up any gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. 
Level 3 - CAR FIRE - $605.00 
Provide scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, hose, tip use, foam, structure protection, and clean up gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. 
Level 4 - $1,800.00 
Includes levels 1 and 2 services as well as extrication (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing etc.). We will bill at this level if the fire department has to free/remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any equipment. We will not bill at this level if the patient is simply unconscious and fire department is able to open the door to access the patient. This level is to be billed only if equipment is deployed. 
Level 5 - $2,200.00 
Includes levels 1, 2, and 4 services as well as air care (multi-engine company response, mutual aid, helicopter). We will bill at this level any time a helicopter is utilized to transport the patient(s). 
Level 6 
Itemized response: You have the option to bill each incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus, per personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
HAZMAT 
Level 1 - $700.00 
Basic response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command. 
Level 2 - $2,500.00 
Intermediate response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Set-up and removal of decon center. 
Level 3 - $5,900.00 
Advanced response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment and robot deployment. Set-up and removal of decon center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal rates of material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene, includes three hours of on scene time—Each additional hour at $300.00 per HAZMAT team. 
PIPELINE INCIDENTS/POWER LINE INCIDENTS 
(Includes, but not limited to: Gas, sewer, septic to sewer, and water pipelines) 
Level 1 - $400.00 
Basic response: Claim will include engine response and first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. Includes inspection without damage or breakage. 
Level 2 - $1,000.00 
Intermediate response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. May include HAZMAT team, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Supervise and/or assist pipeline repair. 
Level 3 - Itemized Claim Charges 
Advanced response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. May include HAZMAT team, level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Supervise and/or assist pipeline repair of intermediate to major pipeline damage. May include set-up and removal of decon center, detection, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. 
FIRE INVESTIGATION 
Fire investigation team - $275.00 per hour. 
Includes: 
•  Scene safety 
•  Investigation 
•  Source identification 
•  K-9/Arson dog unit 
•  Identification equipment 
•  Mobile detection unit 
•  Fire report 
The claim begins when the fire investigator responds to the incident and is billed for logged time only. 
FIRES 
Assignment - $400.00 per hour, per engine/$500.00 per hour, per truck 
Includes: 
•  Scene safety 
•  Investigation 
•  Fire/Hazard control 
This will be the most common "billing level". This occurs almost every time the fire department responds to an incident. 
OPTIONAL: A fire department has the option to bill each fire as an independent event with custom mitigation rates. 
Itemized, per person, at various pay levels and for itemized products use. 
ILLEGAL FIRES 
Assignment - $400.00 per hour, per engine/$500.00 per hour, per truck 
When a fire is started by any person or persons that requires a fire department response during a time or season when fires are regulated or controlled by local or state rules, provisions or ordinances because of pollution or fire danger concerns, such person or persons will be liable for the fire department response at a cost not to exceed the actual expenses incurred by the fire department to respond and contain the fire. Similarly, if a fire is started where permits are required for such a fire and the permit was not obtained and the fire department is required to respond to contain the fire the responsible party will be liable for the response at a cost not to exceed the actual expenses incurred by the fire department. The actual expenses will include direct labor, equipment costs and any other costs that can be reasonably allocated to the cost of the response. 
WATER INCIDENTS 
Level 1 
Basic response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene safety and investigation (including possible patient contact, hazard control). This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time the fire department responds to a water incident. 
Billed at $400.00 plus $50.00 per hour, per rescue person. 
Level 2 
Intermediate response: Includes level 1 services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire department has to dean up small amounts of gasoline or other fluids that are spilled as a result of the incident. 
Billed at $800.00 plus $50.00 per hour, per rescue person. 
Level 3 
Advanced response: Includes level 1 and level 2 services as well as D.A.R.T. activation, donning breathing apparatus and detection equipment. Set up and removal of decon center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal rates of material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene. 
Billed at $2,000.00 plus $50.00 per hour per rescue person, plus $100.00 per hour per HAZMAT team member. 
Level 4 
Itemized response: You have the option to bill each incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates for each incident using itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized, per trained rescue person, plus rescue products used. 
BACK COUNTRY OR SPECIAL RESCUE 
Itemized response: Each incident will be billed with custom mitigation rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus per hour, per trained rescue person per hour, plus rescue products used. 
Minimum billed $400.00 for the first response vehicle plus $50.00 per rescue person. Additional rates of $400.00 per hour per response vehicle and $50.00 per hour per rescue person. 
CHIEF RESPONSE 
This includes the set-up of command, and providing direction of the incident. This could include operations, safety, and administration of the incident. 
Billed at $250.00 per hour. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Engine billed at $400.00 per hour. 
Truck billed at $500.00 per hour. 
Miscellaneous equipment billed at $300.00. 
MITIGATION RATE NOTES 
The mitigation rates above are average "billing levels," and are typical for the incident responses listed, however, when a claim is submitted, it will be itemized and based on the actual services provided. 
These average mitigation rates were determined by itemizing costs for a typical run (from the time a fire apparatus leaves the station until it returns to the station) and are based on the actual costs, using amortized schedules for apparatus (including useful life, equipment, repairs, and maintenance) and labor rates (an average department's "actual personnel expense" and not just a firefighter's basic wage). The actual personnel expense includes costs such as wages, retirement, benefits, workers comp, insurance, etc. 
(Res. of 12-20-2012(1), §§ 1—4(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 14-5—14-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 14-22. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-11. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § VI) 
Sec. 14-23. - Mutual agreement for county emergency management agency. 
In agreement with the governing officials of cities and towns within the county, there is hereby established the Towns County Emergency Management Agency. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § II) 
State Law reference— Duty to designate local building to serve as office of emergency management, powers of local governments regarding emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; qualifications of emergency management personnel, oath, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 14-24. - Emergency management director/coordinator. 
The county commissioner, with concurrence of officials of cities and towns within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the state governor, a director/coordinator of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director/coordinator is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the governing officials of the county and cities and towns therein on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)	To assist county, town, and city officials in organizing county, town, and city departments for emergency operations; 
(3)	To develop, in conjunction with city, town, and county departments and agencies, the county plan for emergency functions; and 
(4)	To maintain the county's emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § II) 
State Law reference— Mandatory qualifications of local director of emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 14-25. - County emergency operations plan; emergency functions of county personnel. 
The county emergency agency shall be established around existing county departments and agencies and emergency functions shall be assigned to county personnel as provided in the emergency operations plan developed by the county emergency management agency and approved on October 29, 2008, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § III; Res. of 1-17-2013(1)) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of emergency management personnel, oath, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 14-26. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the county commissioner, jointly with the mayor of the cities of Hiawassee and Young Harris, or in their absence a legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers to: 
(1)	Enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)	Seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)	Sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)	Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § IV) 
State Law reference— Powers of local governments regarding emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 14-27. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities, towns, and county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Res. of 10-22-1985, § V) 
Secs. 14-28—14-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to enter into mutual aid arrangements, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-29. 

Sec. 14-47. - Mutual aid agreements. 
The county has entered into mutual aid agreements, on file in the office of the county clerk, as follows: 
(1)	With Clay County, Georgia, by agreement dated March 18, 1987; 
(2)	With Paramedic Emergency Medical Service by agreement dated February 19, 1987; 
(3)	With Rabun County, Georgia, by agreement dated July 9, 2009; 
(4)	With Union County, Georgia, by agreement dated March 16, 1987; and 
(5)	With White County, Georgia, by agreement dated September 9, 1986. 
Secs. 14-48—14-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SERVICES 

Sec. 14-74. - Enhanced 911 service charge. 
The county has imposed a charge of $1.00 per month for enhanced 911 services on each cellular phone and wireless phone exchange access facility whose billing address is within the county. 
(Res. No. R2006-04, § 1, 4-20-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority for local government to impose monthly "9-1-1" charges, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133. 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOUNTAIN PROTECTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
All terms contained in this article shall be as defined with O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and, if not defined in said section, then as defined within chapter 40, pertaining to subdivisions, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 3.4) 
Sec. 16-20. - Penalties. 
Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-11. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 8.3) 
Sec. 16-21. - Applicability. 
(a)	Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Protected mountain areas means all land areas 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level, that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally, and shall include the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such area. 
Valley floor means a depression of the earth's surface where the slopes of mountains meet at a lower limit to become nearly level, and including such associated areas at the base or toe of a mountain with a 10:1 (ten percent) slope or less. 
(b)	The mountain protection plan shall apply to any protected mountain areas in the county as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	The crests, summits, and ridge tops of mountains whose flanks meet the criteria for a protected mountain shall also be included within the protected area, even though the slopes of such crests, summits and ridge tops have slopes of less than 25 percent. 
(d)	On an otherwise protected mountain, areas that are at an elevation of 2,200 feet or more and have a slope of less than 25 percent, exclusive of valley floors, shall be included within the protected mountain area. 
(e)	Illustration 1, on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner, provides a graphic of protected mountains according to the definition in subsection (a) of this section. Illustration 2, on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner, indicates the angles of various slopes as a basis of comparison. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 1) 
Sec. 16-22. - Applicability to state agencies. 
These minimum planning standards and procedures shall apply to all state-owned or administered land that contains a protected mountain within its boundaries. All state agencies shall comply with these minimum standards. Failure by a state agency to comply with such standards shall be considered an indication of a governmental action which may significantly adversely affect the quality of the environment under the Environmental Policy Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-16-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 2) 
Secs. 16-23—16-42. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REFERENCES TO EXISTING STATE AND LOCAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 16-43. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)	Proposed land disturbing activity shall meet applicable requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., and of any applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(b)	Standards and requirements established in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. are not superseded by mountain protection standards. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 3.1) 
Sec. 16-44. - Rules for construction of improvements. 
(a)	All site preparation, landscaping, water management, soil erosion and sedimentation devices, and construction of any improvements on lots, acreage, or any land area 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally and/or any crests, summits and ridge tops which lie at elevations of 2,200 feet or more, regardless of percentage slope, within the unincorporated areas of the county shall be installed and constructed in accordance with this article. 
(b)	Upon application for a building permit for land above the 2,200 feet above sea level governed by this article, the applicant shall submit a plat approved by the county planning commission which references the lots, acreage or land area subject to this article. A hand drawing will suffice for a single-family dwelling when the house is being built on property that does not have a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission. These requirements are in addition to all other existing requirements for building permits. 
(c)	Prior to issuance of a building permit for land above the 2,200 feet above sea level governed by this article, the applicant shall provide a site plan and survey which shows the proposed location of improvements as provided in sections 16-70, for single-family dwellings; 16-71, for multifamily dwellings; 16-72, for commercial structures; 16-94, height limitations as apply to single-family dwellings or multifamily and commercial structures; division 6 of this article and section 16-167, for any and all construction of any type. A hand drawing showing the location of the building for single-family dwelling will suffice. 
(d)	Prior to issuance of a building permit and prior to site development for the construction of the building, the building inspector will do an onsite inspection; e.g., to determine that marked trees to be removed do not exceed 50 percent of the existing trees which exceeds eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree 4.5 feet above the surface of the ground, unless the application filed includes an acceptable plan of reforestation developed by a registered forester, and that there is and will be sufficient stormwater control apparatuses, e.g., silt fences, rip-rap or surge stone. 
(e)	The county building department shall have the duty and authority to oversee and enforce the requirements of this section and all applicable terms of this article. The county building department shall have the authority to issue stop work orders and issue citations for violations this article. 
(f)	Appeals process. The builder/owner has the right to appeal any decision or disagreement on decisions made by the building department. Appeals shall be made in the following order: 
(1)	The county building appeals board; 
(2)	The county governing authority; and 
(3)	Courts. 
(Ord. of 2-21-2008, § 3.11) 
Sec. 16-45. - Water supply. 
(a)	Where one or more wells are to be used for individual water supply, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq., the requirements of the rules and regulations of the department of human resources regarding individual or nonpublic wells; and any more stringent requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
(b)	If a public water supply system is to be provided, the water supply system shall meet all applicable requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 3.2) 
Sec. 16-46. - Sewage treatment. 
(a)	Where one or more septic tanks are to be used for individual sewage disposal, the proposed land disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
(b)	If sewage treatment is to be provided by any means other than one or more individual septic tanks, the sewage treatment shall meet all applicable requirements of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 3.3) 
Secs. 16-47—16-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES 

Sec. 16-67. - Hazardous waste disposal and handling. 
(a)	Hazardous waste or solid waste disposal facilities are prohibited from protected mountains. Disposal facilities permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources prior to the adoption of implementing regulations shall be exempt from this criterion. 
(b)	Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited from protected mountains. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.1) 
Sec. 16-68. - Agriculture and forestry. 
Agriculture and forestry are permitted on protected mountains provided that: Such agriculture and forestry must be consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state soil and water conservation commission; and agricultural and forestry activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.2) 
Sec. 16-69. - Mining. 
Mining activity on protected mountains is allowed, if such activity is permitted by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.3) 
Sec. 16-70. - Single-family dwellings. 
Single-family dwellings shall not be constructed at a density of more than one per acre, however, no such acre shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building site. This density restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)	Any lot of less than one acre if such a lot was, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, owned and described as a discrete parcel of real property according to the instrument of title if the person owning the lot on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shown as a discrete parcel of real property on a plat of survey properly recorded in the real property records of the clerk of superior court by the person owning the lot on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)	Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any master plan, planned unit development, special approved development plan, or any other development plan if such plan was filed with and approved by the local governing authority prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, pursuant to a duly enacted planning ordinance; provided further, that any such planning ordinance must have provided rules and procedures and governed lot sizes, density, types of building, and other limitations usually associated with the implementation of local ordinances. (See illustration 3, on file and available for inspection in the office of the county commissioner.) 
(3)	Any development of real property or land disturbing which has occurred prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but does not have approval of the county commissioner for such activity shall not be exempted from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.4) 
Sec. 16-71. - Multiple-family dwellings. 
Multifamily dwellings, shall require a minimum of three-quarters of an acre per dwelling unit in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county board of health as adopted in July 2006. Multiple-family residential developments may be, and are encouraged to be, clustered where the net density of the developed portion of property is higher but the overall gross density of the subject property does not exceed a density greater than three quarters of an acre per dwelling unit, subject to applicable local health department requirements at the time. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.5) 
Sec. 16-72. - Commercial structures. 
Any proposal to construct a commercial structure on a protected mountain shall submit an application, which shall include: 
(1)	A detailed landscaping plan, which shall identify all trees which are to be removed that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground, shall contain a plan for replacement of any such trees that are removed (see illustration 4, which is on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner); and 
(2)	Such application shall also include a topographical survey of the projected site and an assessment of the effect that the project will have on the environment of the protected mountain after the project has been completed and is in operation. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require commercial structures to comply with the density limitations for single- or multiple-family dwellings. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 4.6) 
Secs. 16-73—16-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 16-93. - Tree removal limit without reforestation plan. 
No person engaging in land disturbing activity on a protected mountain shall remove more than 50 percent of the existing trees which exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on such a tree 4½ feet above the surface of the ground unless such person has filed with the application a plan of reforestation developed by a registered forester. (See illustration 5, which is on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner.) 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 5.1) 
Sec. 16-94. - Height limitations. 
(a)	Single-family dwelling structures shall not exceed three stories or extend more than 35 feet in height as measured from the height of a single-family dwelling structure shall be determined by measuring from the point of the highest eave of the structure down to the highest point at which the foundation of such structure intersects the ground. This height limitation shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Water; 
(2)	Radio and television towers; 
(3)	Electric transmission towers and lines; and 
(4)	Minor vertical projections of a parent building, including: 
a.	Chimneys; 
b.	Flagpoles; 
c.	Flues; 
d.	Spires; 
e.	Steeples; 
f.	Belfries; 
g.	Cupolas; 
h.	Antennas; 
i.	Poles; 
j.	Wires; or 
k.	Windmills. 
(See illustration 6, which is on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner.) 
(b)	The height of a structure used for commercial purpose or as a multifamily dwelling, including, but not limited to, townhouses, apartments and condominiums, shall be determined by measuring from the highest point of the utmost portion of the crest, summit, or ridge top of the structure down to the footing. The walls placed upon the footing, including, but not limited to, poured concrete walls, block wall, or any wall consisting of any other type of construction material shall be considered a portion of that structure to be included in the height limitation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 5.2) 
Sec. 16-95. - Road construction. 
All roads on protected mountains shall be designed and constructed to minimize the potential for landslides, erosion, and runoff. (See illustration 7, which is on file and available for inspection at the office of the county commissioner.) 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 5.3) 
Secs. 16-96—16-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT OF POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROTECTED MOUNTAINS 

Sec. 16-117. - Public purposes and private property rights. 
Land development, and the commencement of other activities, if they are consistent with this article, will not have a negative effect on public health, safety or welfare. The application of mountain protection standards to land development and activities will not pose an undue burden on property owners nor result in the diminishing of private property rights. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.1) 
Sec. 16-118. - Conservation of unique/significant flora and fauna. 
(a)	The most significant areas of unique flora and fauna are located on lands owned and managed by the United States Forest Service. Rare and endangered species may be located within areas of protected mountains, although specific sites are not known. 
(b)	Land development and the commencement of other activities, if they are consistent with this article, should not have a negative impact on wildlife and plant and animal habitats, however, all of the county's protected mountains, may have areas worthy of conservation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.2) 
Sec. 16-119. - Groundwater and surface water quality. 
To a significant extent, groundwaters and surface waters are protected by existing state and federal regulations. Furthermore, much of the county's groundwater and surface water is protected through ownership and management by the U.S. Forest Service, through implementation of its Land and Resource Management Plan. Development and other activities consistent with this article will not have an adverse impact on protected mountains. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.3) 
Sec. 16-120. - Aesthetics. 
The visual impact, of development and activities consistent with this article should not be significant. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.4) 
Sec. 16-121. - Historical and archaeological resources. 
Historic and archaeological resources in the county are inventoried and assessed in the comprehensive plan. An analysis of the location of such resources indicates that historic and archaeological resources are predominantly located outside of protected mountain areas. Those resources located within protected mountain areas are largely located on lands owned and managed by the U.S. Forest Service in accordance with its Land Resource Management Plan. Therefore, development consistent with this article is not expected to have any adverse impacts on existing historic and archaeological resources. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.5) 
Sec. 16-122. - Adjacent sensitive natural areas. 
Sensitive natural areas include wildlife habitats, rare natural communities, significant land forms and geological features, flood plains, wetlands, and other such areas sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. Development consistent with this article is not expected to have adverse effects on sensitive natural areas. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.6) 
Sec. 16-123. - Duration of impacts. 
No significant impacts of an adverse nature are anticipated if development conforms to the mountain protection plan. Any minimal impacts that might occur on protected mountains would be temporary. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 6.7) 
Secs. 16-124—1-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MOUNTAIN PROTECTION PERMIT AND SITE PLAN 

Sec. 16-145. - Required. 
An approved site plan and mountain protection permit shall be required for any proposed land, building, sign or other structure to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this article and any other county ordinances before any permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of lands, buildings or other structures commences. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 7) 
Sec. 16-146. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land disturbing activity or construction or any improvements to real property, unless it is exempted by state law, which occur in the area as set forth under section 16-21. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 7) 
Secs. 16-147—16-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-167. - Approval of site plan and issuance of permit. 
(a)	The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the county commissioner by and through its designated representative, the county planning commission. 
(b)	Prior to conducting any land disturbing activity or any improvement, alteration of land, or commencement of any building or other structure, upon any protected mountain area in the county, the owners (or designated agent thereof) of the land to be effected shall present to the county planning commission a site plan which shall include: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the property owner; 
(2)	A topographic survey plat of the proposed site; 
(3)	A metes and bounds plat of survey of the proposed site, including thereon, all building sites and proposed locations of all buildings and improvements and including all building elevations; 
(4)	A statement specifying the location and source of water and sewer or septic service for the proposed improvements; 
(5)	A landscape plan as required under section 16-92 for commercial development; 
(6)	A reforestation plan for any development subject to section 16-93 for tree removal limits; and 
(7)	Such further documents as the planning commission may reasonably request in order to determine compliance with the standards of development as set out in this article. 
(c)	All of the foregoing shall constitute an application for a mountain protection permit. The planning commission shall have 45 days in which to review said application for determination of compliance with this article. In the event, during such review, the planning commission determines more information is necessary from the applicant, it shall request, in writing, such information and mail such request, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant. The applicant shall furnish such requested information to the planning commission within ten days of receipt of said notice, and such information shall be deemed part of the application. During such review period, the county planning commission may request the applicant to appear before the commission to answer any questions or supply further information concerning the matters set forth within the application. Likewise, during said review period, the applicant may request the planning commission to allow the applicant to appear before the planning commission in order to explain or comment upon any matters set forth in the application. It shall be solely within the discretion of the planning commission as whether to request or allow the appearance of the applicant. 
(d)	If the planning commission finds all matters set forth in the application to be in compliance with the requirements of this article, the planning commission shall issue a mountain protection permit to the applicant and shall approve the metes and bounds survey to be recorded upon the deed records maintained in the office of the clerk of the county superior court. In the event the planning commission determines that the matters set forth within the application do not meet the standards and requirements of this article, then in such event the planning commission shall deny issuance of a mountain protection permit to the applicant and shall notify the applicant, in writing, and by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the reasons for the denial of said permit. At any time subsequent to such a denial, the applicant may reapply for the mountain protection permit by submitting a new application in compliance with the standards and matters set forth in this article. No land disturbing activity nor construction or erection of improvements or buildings or structures shall commence upon any protected mountain areas in the county, as defined in this article, unless approved by the county planning commission and has been recorded upon the records maintained by the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 8.1) 
Sec. 16-168. - Determining compliance. 
(a)	The filing of an application for a mountain protection permit shall be deemed to constitute the consent of the owner of the property described therein for the county planning commission, by its designated representative, to enter upon the property for the purposes of verifying the information contained within the application and to determine whether there has been compliance, during land disturbing activity and/or construction or erection of improvements, with this article or with the plans submitted as part of the application. 
(b)	In the event the planning commission determines there is a failure to comply with this article or such plans, a stop work order shall be issued by the planning commission and sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property as disclosed on the application, and such order shall specify the act of noncompliance as found by the commission, and what acts must be taken by the owner to be in compliance with this article or such plans. Thereafter, the owner shall have 15 days in which to bring the property into compliance and until which no further work shall be done on the property except as may be necessary solely to bring the property into compliance with this article or such plans. The continuing of any work upon the property, after receipt of a stop work order, and except as necessary to bring the property into compliance, shall be in violation of this article. Failure to bring the property into compliance within 15 days of receipt of such a stop work order shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2006(2), § 8.2) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 

Secs. 18-19—18-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 18-40. - Worker's compensation benefits for volunteer firefighters. 
The county shall afford worker's compensation benefits for the volunteer firefighters participating in the volunteer fire department under the terms and conditions of the county's existing worker's compensation policy. The county's volunteer firefighters shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties the county's volunteer firefighters shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws. 
(Res. of 6-2-1987; Res. of 2-23-1988) 
Secs. 18-41—18-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BLASTING 

Sec. 18-69. - Jurisdiction; applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to any blasting operations occurring within the environs of the county as controlled by the state office of insurance and fire safety as more particularly as set out in the rules and regulations for explosives and blasting agents, Ga. Admin. Code § 120-3-10-.01 et seq. As well as O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq. This article shall also apply to landowners and their agents causing such events to occur. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 18-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertisement means a notice of the blasting event published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the county at least one week prior to the blasting event. 
Applicant means any person representing the owner of land within the county that requires the use of explosives. 
Authority having jurisdiction means the county commissioner or his designated agent. 
Blasting times means the hours beginning 30 minutes after sunrise and ending 30 minutes before sunset. 
Business days means Monday through Saturday, excluding the following holidays: Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day after, Independence Day (4th of July), Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, and New Year's Day. 
County means all unincorporated areas of Towns County and excluding the areas lying within the incorporated areas of Young Harris, Georgia, and Hiawassee, Georgia. 
Permit means a certificate or letter issued by the county commissioner or his designee showing that the applicant has met all of the requirements under Ga. Admin. Code § 120-3-10-.01 et seq. as required by the state office of insurance and fire safety, is in full compliance with O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq., and has complied with the advertisement and notice requirements set forth in this article. 
Surrounding property owners means owners or occupants of any property which lies within 1,000 feet of the blast point on which the blast occurs. This distance shall be measured, due to the high number of slopes in the county, from the nearest point of the blast point as measured by a surveyor by transit and not along the contour of the land. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 18-71. - Penalties. 
Any person violating, ignoring, or refusing to abide by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and after having been found to have violated same by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-11. The county commissioner or its designee shall enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 18-72. - Permit required. 
Any person or entity wishing to use TNT, dynamite, or any explosive material within the county shall apply to the county for a permit at least 24 hours prior to any such blasting event. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 18-73. - Application for issuance of permit. 
The application for permit under this article shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	Proof of proper license issued to the applicant or landowner or his agent by the state office of insurance and fire safety; 
(2)	Proof of advertisement at least one week in the legal organ of the county prior to any blasting event giving notice to the public of the time, date, and location of the blasting event; 
(3)	Certification of notice either by phone, mail, or personal notification to surrounding property owners or occupiers of land within 1,000 feet of the blast point; and 
(4)	Verification that the blasting event will only occur during business days and during blasting times as defined herein. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 18-74. - Permit fee. 
The applicant for a permit shall pay an administrative fee in the amount determined from time to time by the county commissioner to offset the costs of notifying fire and emergency services of the upcoming blasting event. The applicant shall be responsible for the costs of the legal ad required. 
(Ord. of 8-17-2006, § 4) 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State health care and planning, O.C.G.A. § 31-6-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Smoking in public buildings prohibited. 
All public buildings belonging to the county are hereby declared to be nonsmoking facilities, and smoking is prohibited inside any building owned or operated by the county. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2004) 
State Law reference— Smoke free air, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; smoking prohibited in local government buildings, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-2. 
Chapter 22 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Factory built buildings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.; manufactured or mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" includes the following: travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, park trailer, and fifth wheel travel trailer. 
State Law reference— Similar definition, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-679. 
Secs. 22-2—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME GUIDELINES 

Sec. 22-19. - Permits to locate or move all mobile homes. 
A county permit is required for location or relocation of a mobile home within the unincorporated areas of the county. Application for such permit shall be made to the building official, on the form provided by him, and accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established from time to time by the county commissioner as shown in the county fee schedule. 
(Res. of 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 22-20. - Application for permit. 
The application for permit under this article shall be accompanied by: 
(1)	A sketch or drawing indicating the approximate location of the proposed structure including the setbacks from the property line. 
(2)	A copy of the recorded easement if the property does not front a county road. 
(3)	A copy of the approved septic tank permit, or if on a sewer, a copy of the paid receipt or a letter indicating approval to tap on. 
Sec. 22-21. - Lot size restrictions. 
No permit shall be issued on or after May 1, 2001, for a lot size less than 0.75 acres unless specifically approved and excepted from this section by the county board of health and the sole commissioner. 
(County Board of Health Min. of 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 22-22. - Structure numbers. 
Temporary structure numbers will be assigned by E-911/Mapping to each new lot, tract, or building site on the original drawing of a final subdivision plat, mobile home park plan, planned unit development. 
Sec. 22-23. - Permanent driveway required. 
A permanent address will not be assigned until the permanent driveway is cut into its location 
Secs. 22-24—22-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 

Sec. 22-48. - Sale, rental of lots or spaces. 
(a)	This article is intended to cover those parks where the lots will be rented or leased. No individual lot in any park may be sold, or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and park shall meet all requirements of the county single-family and residential subdivision regulations in chapter 40, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(b)	No spaces are to be rented until final approval by the planning commission. 
(Res. of 4-26-1990; Ord. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII; Amd. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII) 
Sec. 22-49. - Minimum design standards and restrictions for mobile home parks. 
Minimum design standards and restrictions for mobile home parks are as follows: 
(1)	The minimum land area of any mobile home park shall be five acres, suitable for development. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 8,000 square feet subject to health department approval if separate individual sewage disposal facilities are located within the bounds of the mobile home space; in cases where shared, or central sewage disposal facilities are utilized, the space size may be reduced to 6,000 square feet. All mobile home space lot lines and the type of sewage disposal proposed for each space shall be clearly delineated on a site plan. 
(2)	No mobile home within the park shall be located closer than ten feet to adjoining property lines and the from setback for each mobile home shall be at least 20 feet from the front lot line. 
(3)	Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 20 feet. 
(4)	Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces per each mobile home lot and two additional spaces provided for each three units per visitor. 
(5)	All mobile home lots shall abut upon interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have not less than a 30-foot right-of-way and have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(6)	All interior streets within the park shall be graded and based in accordance with county standards. If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan-profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. All streets shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide plus a four-foot shoulder on either side. All curves and cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
(7)	Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the county water authority, when appropriate water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of a site plan to the planning commission. 
(Res. of 4-26-1990; Ord. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII; Amd. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII) 
Sec. 22-50. - Minimum design standards and restrictions for recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks. 
Minimum design standards and restrictions for recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks are as follows: 
(1)	The minimum land area of any recreational vehicle or travel trailer park shall be five acres, suitable for development. Each space within the park shall have a minimum finished (excluding slope) area of not less than 3,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. 
(2)	Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street, or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved by the planning commission. 
(3)	Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 30 feet of street frontage, and shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet. 
(4)	Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of one parking space per each travel trailer lot. 
(5)	All travel trailer lots shall abut upon interior streets. All interior streets shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(6)	All interior streets within the park shall be graded, stabilized, and covered with a dust-free material, which shall be durable and well-drained under normal use and weather conditions. All streets shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide with a four-foot shoulder on either side. All curves and cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
(7)	If lots are to be sold for private ownership, sections 40-33 and 40-34 shall apply and covenants governing the conditions and restrictions of the park shall be submitted and approved by the county planning commission. Changes to the covenants must also be submitted and approved by the county planning commission. 
(8)	No permanent structures and nonmotorized vehicles, except those falling under the definition of the term "recreation vehicle," shall be permitted on any approved lot within the park. 
(9)	Parks designed to accommodate 15 or more travel trailers; campers, etc., shall provide one or more recreation areas. Parks of five acres or more shall provide green space of 20 percent total area and of which no more than 50 percent shall be used for sanitation disposal. 
(10)	Water supply and sewage disposal. Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the county water authority, when appropriate. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of the site plan to the planning commission. 
(11)	Each campsite located within the 100-year flood plain shall be marked with a permanent sign so indicating at each campsite. 
(Res. of 4-26-1990; Ord. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII; Amd. of 11-8-1993, art. XVII) 
Sec. 22-51. - Allowing conservation and environmentally friendly subdivisions. 
Incentives to encourage developers to consider these types of subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)	Fast track approval of subdivisions by direct approval of conservation subdivision by the commissioner. 
(2)	Waive fees required of regular subdivisions. 
(3)	Road paving requirements: 3.5 inches of asphalt or two inches of binder followed by a bituminous tack coat, and 1.5 inches of asphalt topping. In lieu of having the road paving completed at the time of final approval of subdivision, the developer may file an irrevocable line of credit from an approved financial institute. See the following price per running foot guaranteeing the completion of the paving within 12 months. (Prices are subject to change.) 

 
(4)	Roads will be inspected and approved by the county road superintendent or his designee. 
(5)	The conservation board will work with and make recommendations to the developer and promote the subdivision as being environmentally friendly. The conservation board can recommend the commissioner grant variances for roads in some circumstances that would conserve and protect the environment. 
(6)	Squares 100 by 100 feet will be allowed in lieu of the 150 by 150 feet square for lots less than three acres. Further, lots of less than three acres must contribute enough acreage to the development green space set aside such that the total area of the subdivision attributable to each individual lot shall be equal to or greater than three acres. Setbacks on lots greater than one acre, but less than three acres must have the setback requirements of three acres lots. 

 
(7)	Minimum building setback lines are as follows: 

 
(8)	Existing subdivisions will be allowed to recombine two or more lots into larger lots. 
(9)	These subdivisions will be protected by mandatory restrictions on the plats and within the covenants that prohibit any further subdividing of the land or disturbance of the green space with the following exceptions: Six acre tracts or larger may be divided in the future that meet the preceding requirements. With no further business, the meeting was adjourned at 2:00 p.m. 
(Min. of 3-15-2007; Min. of 1-31-2008, exh. B) 
Sec. 22-52. - Recommendations for county roads and subdivisions. 
Recommendations for county roads and subdivisions made by the county subdivision and land development committee are as follows: 
(1)	There shall be no wooden bridges. 
(2)	County road grade will not be greater than 18 percent, and shall not be over 20 percent for no more than 200 feet. 
(3)	Base requirements: minimum of eight inches, and six inches depth after compacting. Paving requirements: 3.5 inches of asphalt or two inches of binder following by a bituminous tack coat, and 1.5 inches of asphalt topping. In lieu of having the road paved and completed at the time of final approval, the developer may file an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution or a bond guaranteeing the completion of the paving within 12 months. Prices per running foot are as follows (prices subject to change): 

 
(4)	On subdivisions of 35 lots or less, the developer is to have base put down on all roads in the subdivision, and wait until 75 percent of lots are built upon until top coat is finished or three years. 
(5)	One way roads and single lane roads should have a minimum of 12 feet wide paved area with a 16-foot road bed, and a 25-foot right-of-way. Pull offs would be necessary where needed. The road would follow guidelines for compaction, paving and inspection. The road bed is to be compacted before utilities are put in. 
(6)	Twelve-foot paved roads should have a three-foot shoulder even with the road. 
(7)	Shoulders on all paved roads are to be leveled to the top of the road and be three feet wide. The slope on shoulders should be no less than one inch per three feet and no more than three inches. Packing of the shoulder will be necessary with grass grown to prevent washing. 
(8)	Private roads are to be built with no more than 25 percent grade with a possibility of a hardship variance if deemed necessary. 
(9)	Cul-de-sacs. County subdivisions that include cul-de-sacs without an island can be 40 feet in diameter and those with an island, which may not exceed 30 feet in diameter, shall be 80 feet in diameter. 
(10)	Hammerheads: 30 feet deep and 30 feet wide from either side of road, not counting width of road. 
(Min. of 8-16-2007) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY CURFEW 

Sec. 24-101. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Towns County. 
(b)	All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)	The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord of 6-21-2012(4), § 1) 
Sec. 24-102. - Definitions. 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, 'exempt individuals' include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical service hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to the Towns County Ordinance to require registration of building and repair services during a state of emergency, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord of 6-21-2012(4), § 2) 
Sec. 24-103. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Towns County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord of 6-21-2012(4), § 3) 
Sec. 24-104. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord of 6-21-2012(4), § 4) 
Chapter 30 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Labor and industrial relations generally, O.C.G.A. § 34-1-1 et seq.; retirement and pensions generally, O.C.G.A. § 47-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Policies and procedures. 
The county has from time to time established and amended certain personnel policies and procedures that are available in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 30-2. - Salaries and salary increases for elected county constitutional officials. 
The salaries of elected county constitutional officials shall be calculated based on minimum base salary guidelines provided by state law, plus cost of living adjustment (COLA) salary increases as provided by state law, plus longevity salary increases as provided by state law taking into consideration similar increases in surrounding counties, with no local supplements to be granted beyond their term unless as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009(1)) 
Chapter 32 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal planning, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of comprehensive plan. 
The comprehensive plan for the county and the cities of Hiawassee, Georgia, and Young Harris, Georgia, is hereby approved and adopted by the county, along with the accompanying maps, goals, policies, objectives and programs, as a general guide for future growth, change, development and progress. 
(Res. of 9-12-1994) 
Chapter 34 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Directional sign means: 
(1)	A sign, permanently erected or permitted in the public right-of-way or private property by county or other governmental agency to denote the name of any thoroughfare; the route to any city, town, or village, educational institution, public building, historic place, shrine or hospital; to direct and regulate traffic; to denote any railroad crossing, bridge or other transportation company for the direction or safety of the public; 
(2)	A sign, notice or symbol for the Federal Aviation Agency as to locations, directions, landings and conditions affecting safety in aviation; or 
(3)	An on-premises temporary sign which contains information regarding the time and place of regular meetings of civic or religious groups. 
Director sign means a sign listing only the names, use or location of more than one business, activity or professional office conducted within a building group of buildings or commercial center. 
Double-faced sign means a sign with two faces that are usually, but not necessarily, parallel. 
Electrical sign means a self-illuminated sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections or fixtures are used as part of the sign proper. 
Facade means the entire building wall, including main street wall face, and parapet, fascia, windows, doors, canopy and roof on any complete elevation. 
Flashing sign means any lighted or electrical sign that emits light in sudden transitory bursts. 
Freestanding sign means a sign supported by a sign structure secured in the ground and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle or other support. 
Illuminated sign (external) means any sign that is directly lighted by an external source. 
Illuminated sign (internal) means any sign that transmits light through its face or any part thereof. 
Inflatable sign means a sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gasses contained within the sign or sign parts at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
Ingress/egress sign means a sign which designates only the direction of ingress or egress of a parking area or driveway, such as "Enter," "Exit," "One Way," "Do Not Enter," etc. 
Nonprofit sign means any sign identifying public service, religious or civic club organizations and the activities they conduct or participate in. 
Occupancy means any use of or activity upon the premises. 
Off-premises sign means any sign located or proposed to be located any place other than within the same platted parcel of land which the specific business or activity promoted on such sign is itself located or conducted. For purposes of this chapter, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premises sign. 
On-premises sign means any sign located or proposed to be located any place, if otherwise permitted by this chapter, within the plat of record for the business or other activity identified on such sign. 
Painted wall sign means a sign painted directly on any exterior building wall, roof, window or door surface. 
Panel means the primary surface of a sign upon which the message of the sign is carried. 
Permitted sign means a sign for which a valid permit has been issued. 
Political sign means a sign erected by a political candidate, group or agent thereof, for the purpose of advertising a candidate or stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the county shall vote. 
Portable sign means any sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground or which is attached to a motor vehicle. 
Premises means property within the unincorporated areas of the county, as shown by recorded deed or plat of record by which the owner of record acquired title and which is affected either directly or indirectly by this chapter. 
Project sign means any sign erected and maintained on the premises temporarily while undergoing construction by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services, or material. 
Public right-of-way line means the line where the property meets the public right-of-way at a public street or public waterway, provided that this definition shall not include unimproved alleys, easements or other similar dedicated uses. 
Public way means any street, highway, road, path or right-of-way, whether privately or publicly owned, which is designated or used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, either by public right or custom or by invitation of two or more common owners. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property, upon which the sign is located, for rent, lease or sale. 
Roof means the exterior upper covering of the top of a building. 
Roof sign means any sign erected on, and wholly or partially dependent upon the roof of any building for support, or attached to the roof in any way. 
Rotating sign means any sign that revolves around one or more fixed areas. 
Sidewalk sign or sandwich sign means a moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground or any building or structure. 
Sign means any device or presentation for visual communication used for the purpose of bringing the subject to the attention of others which is located on or attached to the premises, real property, structures on real property or a vehicle. 
Sign area means the square-foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign face. On signs which are composed of individual symbols, letters, figures, illustrations, messages, forms or panels, the sign area shall include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, and frame around the sign and cutouts or extensions, but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing. 
Sign face means the part of the sign that is used, or can be used, to identify or communicate information or for visual representation that attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. The sign face includes any background material, panel, trim or color that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon which or against which it is placed. The sign structure shall not be included as a portion of the sign face, provided no message, symbol or any of the aforementioned sign face criteria are displayed on, or designated as part of the sign structure. 
Sign structure means a supporting structure erected, used or intended for the purpose of identification or attracting attention, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to the premises, upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed or applied. The definition of the term "sign structure" shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm. 
Snipe sign means a sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes or fences, or to other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
Special event sign means a sign that carries a message regarding a special event or function that is of general interest to the community. 
Swinging sign means a sign installed on an arm, mast or spar that is not, in addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole. 
Temporary sign means any sign or information transmitting structure intended to be erected or displayed for a limited period of time. 
Time and temperature sign means an electrical sign utilizing lights that periodically go on and off to display the current time and temperature in the community. 
Traffic directions/safety sign means a sign that is on the premises; consisting of type and/or an arrow; and is designed, sized and erected solely for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic direction or safety. Such sign will have no advertising words or phrases. 
Vehicle sign means a permanent or temporary sign affixed, painted on or placed in or upon any vehicle, trailer or other device capable of being driven or towed, which is displayed in public view under such circumstances as to location of the premises, time of day, duration, availability of other parking space on the premises, and the proximity of the vehicle to the area on the premises where it is loaded, unloaded or otherwise carries out its principal functions, which circumstances indicate that the primary purpose of the display is to attract the attention of the public rather than to serve the business or the owner thereof in the manner which is customary for the vehicle. 
Window sign means any sign which is painted on, applied to, attached to or projected upon or within the exterior of a building glass area, including doors, or located within three feet of the interior of a building glass area, including doors, whose identification, message, symbol, insignia, visual, representation, logotype or any other form which communications information can be read from off-premises contiguous property or public right-of-way. 
Window sign (temporary) means a window sign of a temporary nature used to direct attention to the sale of merchandise, or a change in the status of the business, including, but not limited to, sign for sales, special and grand openings. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000, app. A) 
Sec. 34-2. - Penalties. 
Any person that does any act prohibited by this chapter or that fails to discharge any duty imposed by this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of the county code and subject to the process of the county magistrate's court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-3. - Objective and purpose. 
(a)	The objective of this chapter is to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the county, establish requirements to regulate the number, size, placement, installation, and maintenance of signs and off-premises advertising. With these objectives in mind, it is the intention of this chapter to authorize the use of signs that are: 
(1)	Compatible with their surroundings in terms of existing land use and architectural characteristic; 
(2)	Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; and 
(3)	Expressive of the identity of the individual properties or of the county as a whole. 
(b)	In addition, the regulation of signs within the county is necessary and in the public interest: 
(1)	To protect property values within the county; 
(2)	To protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed and situated signs; 
(3)	To promote the economic well-being of the county by creating a favorable physical image; 
(4)	To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
(5)	To eliminate the clutter and unsightliness of excessive signage; 
(6)	To protect the right of citizens to enjoy the county's natural scenic beauty; 
(7)	To encourage the development of tourism; and 
(8)	To regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property, especially during periods of high winds. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-4. - Jurisdiction and applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the unincorporated areas of the county. This chapter shall not relate to the copy or message on a sign within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-5. - Compliance with technical codes required. 
All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with the building and electrical codes adopted by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-6. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision or requirement of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this Code or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-7. - Enforcement official; citations. 
It shall be the duty of the county sheriff to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter that a violation has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring an appearance before the county magistrate's court. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Secs. 34-8—34-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN PERMITS 

Sec. 34-33. - Required. 
No sign shall be erected in the unincorporated areas of the county unless a permit therefor has been issued by the county as set forth in this article. 
Sec. 34-34. - Applications. 
Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner, or his agent, with the county planning commission or its designee upon forms furnished by the county. The applications shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this chapter; 
(2)	The value of the sign; 
(3)	The street address upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property; 
(4)	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face; 
(5)	The name and address of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
(6)	Written consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement of the sign; 
(7)	A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the building code adopted by the county, and any additional information that the planning commission or its designee may require on such sketch or print to ensure compliance with this article; 
(8)	The name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor; 
(9)	In the case of electrical signs, an electrical permit issued by the appropriate county issuing authority; 
(10)	A written agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every type that may in any manner be caused by the sign structure. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-35. - Fee. 
The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established from time to time by the county commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-36. - Expiration of permits. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of two months from the date of issuance and completed within six months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-37. - Effect of issuance of permit. 
Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if upon further review of available information the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-38. - Signs exempt from permit requirement. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following on-premises signs may be erected without securing a permit. Such exempt signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number or size of signs on a lot; provided, however, that they must comply with all other applicable sections of this article and applicable codes and regulations. The erection of any sign not listed in this section or exceeding the maximum size limitations in this section, shall require either a permit or a variance. Exempt signs are: 
(1)	Multiple on-site tenant locations with a single master sign listing all tenants, as long as the master sign adheres to the requirements of this article as it relates to a single tenant; 
(2)	One professional name plate for each establishment and provided that the nameplate shall not exceed eight square feet in area; 
(3)	One separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of not more than ten percent of the wall or window area; 
(4)	One information bulletin board for public, charitable, educational, or religious institutions when located on the premises of the institution and provided that bulletin boards may not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be located in such a manner that the bulletin board will satisfy the required setback requirements; 
(5)	Traffic, directional, warning, or official notices or signs owned by any public agency or office; 
(6)	Real estate signs, limited to one nonilluminated temporary real estate sign per street frontage and subject to the following restrictions and exceptions: 
a.	Maximum sign area shall be limited to six square feet with a maximum height of four feet in all residential districts and a maximum height of eight feet in all nonresidential districts. 
b.	Multiple listing strips and sale pending signs, provided that they do not exceed two square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet, may be allowed in addition to the requirements referenced in subsection (6)a of this section. Sold signs may also be allowed when attached to the base sign. 
c.	One on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding two square feet in area with a maximum height of four feet, may be allowed in addition to the requirements referenced in subsections (6)a and b of this section. 
(7)	Governmental flags and insignia subject to being flown in accordance with standard protocol; 
(8)	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings; 
(9)	Nonadvertising directional signs or symbols, such as 911 numbers, not exceeding two square feet, designed to direct and inform the public as to location of or directions to a parcel of private property, e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, no trespassing, service areas, or loading and unloading areas; 
(10)	Signs that appear on vending machines as long as the sign refers to the product contained within or on the device; 
(11)	Gasoline pump signs on gasoline pumps that provide information to the public, e.g., gallons, price, octane rating, and type of fuel, including (since the trade name of the business is often incorporated into the name of the different types of fuel) the trade name and any associated symbols; 
(12)	Political signs, provided that: 
a.	The sign shall not be displayed more than 90 days prior to the primary election, general election or referendum it concerns and shall be removed within 21 days after the election has been held. Any candidate who advances to either a runoff or general election may leave his sign until 21 days past that election. The owner of the property on which the sign is located and the candidate are responsible for removing the sign. 
b.	The sign shall be located entirely on private property. No sign shall be placed on any public lands or public right-of-way and shall not be attached to any other sign, utility pole, tree, rock, or other form of vegetation or natural feature. 
c.	The number of signs displayed shall be restricted to one sign per parcel of property per candidate. 
d.	Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
e.	Signs cannot obstruct businesses, be a traffic hazard, impede another landowner's view or a sight distance for roads accessing highways. 
(13)	Signs for temporary garage sales, yard sales, and the like, located in residential districts, provided that: 
a.	On-premises signs shall be limited to one sign per parcel of property; 
b.	The maximum area of the sign shall be six square feet and the maximum height shall be four feet; 
c.	Signs must be removed at the close of sale; 
d.	Signs may not be attached to existing road signs, trees, power poles, telephone poles or other directional signs on the street. 
(14)	Signs located on the inside of windows intended for the purpose of disseminating information about special sales or promotional campaigns, provided that such signs are temporary in nature, and are constructed of such materials that clearly indicate that they are temporary; 
(15)	Works of art that do not contain a commercial message; 
(16)	Historic signs; 
(17)	Municipal signs; 
(18)	Signs on public transportation vehicles; 
(19)	Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles that are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians, which signs may include signs for realtors, surveyors, engineers, plumbers, electricians, delivery trucks, lawn services, etc. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Secs. 34-39—34-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 34-65. - Variances. 
Variances from provisions of this article may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the county planning commission. No variance will be granted where the requested variation results in the size, shape, height or other restrictive dimension or measurement of any sign or support structure exceeding the provisions of this article by 30 percent or more. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-66. - Prohibited signs and exceptions. 
The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited: 
(1)	Signs that advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws; 
(2)	Portable signs, except that they shall be allowed only for a maximum period of 180 days for a new business or new owner of any existing business; 
(3)	Snipe signs; 
(4)	A-frame signs, sandwich type signs, sidewalk signs, or curb signs; 
(5)	Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings; 
(6)	Flags, except the United States flag, the state flag, or other official flag; 
(7)	Banners, streamers, tethered balloons or other inflatable signs or figures, except that the use of these items for special promotions will be allowed for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days within any six-month period, and except further that this subsection does not apply to civic organizations, churches, or nonprofit organizations; 
(8)	Signs that contain or make use of the words: "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar words or phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic, except construction signs or barricades and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business; 
(9)	Signs that contain any moving, flashing, or animated lights; 
(10)	Signs consisting of or incorporating search lights and beacons or any blinking signs; 
(11)	Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type that are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians unless the vehicle contains a valid tag and is insured; 
(12)	Signs that emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-67. - Other types of signs permitted. 
If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically prohibited as provided under this article, shall be permitted, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-68. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Any sign erected or existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be deemed to be a nonconforming sign. 
(b)	A nonconforming sign may be maintained only by painting or refinishing the surface of the sign face or sign structure to keep up the appearance of the sign. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, have its existing configuration altered or be relocated on the property without a permit being obtained. 
(c)	In event a business changes ownership and said business had an existing sign, the new owner may keep the existing sign for the duration of the years remaining before complying with this article is required, however, if the new owner changes the name of the business a sign permit must be obtained. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-69. - General requirements for all signs. 
Signs, regardless of the district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. 
(2)	All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(3)	All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with the electrical code adopted by the county. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in such manner so as to adhere to any and all utility company rights-of-way, requirements and specifications with approval obtained from all utility companies. 
(4)	Corner visibility clearance is required. In any instance, no sign or sign structure (above the height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-70. - Lighting requirements and restrictions. 
(a)	Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected or maintained. 
(b)	The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. Lighting shall not be directed skyward. 
(c)	No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within 150 feet of any residential dwelling as measured from the closest point on the closest property line of the residential dwelling from said sign. 
(d)	No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign in such a manner as to confuse or mislead the motoring public or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 34-71. - Height requirements. 
No permitted sign, regardless of type, shall exceed the lesser of 30 feet as measured from ground level to the top of the sign, inclusive of any border and trim, or the highest portion of the roofline of the building. 
Sec. 34-72. - Off-premises signs, including billboards. 
(a)	No individual off-premises sign shall exceed an area of 300 square feet per face with the limitation of one face per location per direction of travel. 
(b)	The land surrounding an off-premises sign must be landscaped and maintained in a manner to enhance and conceal any support poles and base of sign. The height of off-premises signs shall not exceed 30 feet measured from the ground supporting the sign to the top of the sign (inclusive of any frame). 
(Ord. of 4-17-2000) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(4.1). 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(8). 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Industrial solid waste means waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, fertilizer, agricultural chemicals, food and food-related products and other byproducts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(12.1). 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. The definition of the term "inert waste" excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed in this definition, as provided in section 391-3-4-.06 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.06). 
Litter means discarded materials of every kind as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1), including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, rubbish, any and all other waste material, including, but not limited to, all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building materials, wood, cuttings, trees, limbs, and any other discarded substance of any kind, as well as any object which is thrown or deposited as provided in this chapter tends to create a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or industrial processes or operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18). 
Open dump or dump site means a disposal site, location or facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment as defined in section 391-3-4-.01(44) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.01(44)). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(25). 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect, or one that cannot be retreated or otherwise recycled O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(31). 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under section 391-3-4-.19(5.g) (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.19(5.g)) for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(32). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2.i) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.19(2.i)). 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution contract facility; and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342, or source, special nuclear, or byproduct materials as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 USC 2011 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(34). 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of nonhazardous, low-impact animal byproducts, "waste" includes without limitation, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, dead animals, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste which is nonhazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by the state department of natural resources, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § I) 
Sec. 36-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any portion of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense, by penalty set forth in section 1-11; 
(2)	For the second or more offenses, the violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both; 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the court, the offender may also be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public streets, highways, or other public right-of-way or private areas for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution or sentence as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b); 
(4)	In the sound discretion of the court, the offender may be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
(5)	In the sound discretion of the court, the court may order the publication of the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter; 
(6)	In the sound discretion of the court, the court may order the violator to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; 
(7)	In the case of an improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this chapter, at the offender's expenses and provided that the county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and 
(8)	The offender shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the county for cleanup and enforcement of violations, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VII) 
Sec. 36-3. - Recycling. 
The county has determined that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials that must be properly disposed of. Therefore, it is the policy of the county to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § XII) 
Sec. 36-4. - Landfills restricted; permit required for private municipal landfills. 
(a)	No landfill shall be operated in the county other than a landfill designated by the county commissioner as the county landfill. 
(b)	No private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in the county without a solid waste-handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division, with the exception of inert construction and demolition landfills having been properly permitted as such by the state department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § V) 
Sec. 36-5. - Debris management plan. 
The County of Towns formally adopts the Towns County Georgia Debris Management Plan. A copy of the plan is available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 3-20-2014(1)) 
Secs. 36-6—36-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-27. - Responsibility of owners and occupants. 
The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all litter, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § II) 
Sec. 36-28. - Accumulation, burying and burning of waste prohibited. 
(a)	No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation, on his premises, of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(b)	No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written permission from the county commissioner or applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Protection Division and/or the state forestry service. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VI) 
Sec. 36-29. - Dumping prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in the county including, and without limitations, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless such litter or waste originates in the county or in other areas authorized by the county commissioner and: 
(1)	The property is designated by the county commissioner or its designated agent as acceptable for the disposal of litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	The litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property and such purpose; and 
(3)	The property has a valid solid waste-handling permit issued by environmental protection division. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste, unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)	In or on any public highways, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)	In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, stream, or creek; or 
(3)	In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § II) 
Sec. 36-30. - Disposal of scrap tires by scrap tire generators, carriers, and retailers. 
All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.19 and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-33-4 (Ga. Admin. Code § 391-33-4 et seq.) applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § II) 
Sec. 36-31. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from said vehicle. 
(b)	Any litter or municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public or private property in the county. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets, or roadways, in the county without suitable coverings or other restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited onto other motor vehicles, pedestrians, or the roadway and its adjoining areas. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for a business or private person engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to a county landfill or dump site to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence customers, rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county for said recyclables. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § III) 
Sec. 36-32. - Collection center; hours; attendant. 
(a)	The county has elected to operate one or more solid waste collection and recycling centers, at the discretion of the county commissioner, and to employ an attendant for each such center to oversee its operation. 
(b)	The hours of operation of the centers shall be as established from time to time by the county commissioner; provided, however, that the hours of operation will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(c)	Center attendants employed by the county while on duty shall have full authority of the center for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 36-33. - Sanitary condition required. 
All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-34. - Restrictions on disposal of waste. 
(a)	No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in such a manner that it can be handled by the attendant. 
(b)	Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)	Solid waste shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation, unless express written permission is given by the county commissioner or its designee. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)	No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste and recycling center. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-35. - Deposit of waste in recycling receptacles restricted. 
No person shall deposit solid waste, water or litter of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county-owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as a glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-36. - Disposal of scrap tires, certain large items, and dead animals prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the county commissioner or its designee. 
(b)	No person shall deposit large noncompatible articles in containers or receptacles such as, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(c)	No dead animals, livestock or poultry shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-37. - Fire, flammables, and explosives prohibited in containers. 
No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle. No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-38. - Damage to containers and relocation of containers prohibited 
No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the county commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-39. - Salvage and scavenging prohibited. 
No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles or at any solid waste collection and recycling center except by written consent of the county commissioner. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IV) 
Sec. 36-40. - Yard trimming disposal restricted. 
(a)	Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. 
(b)	Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § XI) 
Sec. 36-41. - Fees for waste disposal. 
(a)	Nonrecyclable waste. Disposal fees for disposable solid waste brought to the county's waste collection and recycling center will be set by the county commissioner in an amount sufficient to defray the total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(b)	Recyclable waste. All recyclable materials brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided that it is separated under current market specifications, as prescribed by the county commissioner, and uncontaminated. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § V) 
Secs. 36-42—36-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 36-71. - Administrative officials. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county commissioner, the county environmental education and enforcement officer or his designee, the county marshal or his designee, and the county sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VIII) 
Sec. 36-72. - Right of entry. 
Any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article; provided, however, that entry onto private property for inspection, shall be permitted only if: 
(1)	The alleged violation is visible from a public road or right-of-way; 
(2)	The alleged violation is reported to the inspecting officer by a valid complaint from a resident of the county alleging a violation of this article; or 
(3)	The entry is permitted by a court order upon the court's finding that the inspecting officer has received information or allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VIII) 
Sec. 36-73. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)	Whenever litter, or any type of waste as defined in this chapter, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the person or the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(b)	Whenever any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this chapter, that is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings that display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § X) 
Sec. 36-74. - Continuing violation. 
Each day that a violation of this article occurs or continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense, punishable as set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 36-75. - Reservation of civil remedies. 
This division shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VII) 
Sec. 36-76. - County's remedies not exclusive. 
In addition to actions filed by the county for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § VII) 
Sec. 36-77. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)	In the event any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, clean up or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate such violation, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52 and 16-7-53. 
(b)	Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the notice of violation shall be submitted as evidence for consideration of the first offense before the court and the pending case treated as a second offense. 
(c)	If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court or the county commissioner may cause written notice to be given to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which the violator is convicted. The notice shall be by personal service or, in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)	Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the county commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, materials including, but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste as defined in this article, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and a statement of the amount due for said expenses shall be sent by the county commissioner or the court by registered mail. 
(e)	When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of the notice as provided in this section, the county commissioner shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)	In the event that wastes or hazardous materials in a dump site cannot be removed from public or private property without causing further endangerment to the environment or to the public health, whether legal or illegal, caused with intent or by accident, acts of God or forces of nature, or where a permit for such long-term or permanent disposal has been issued by the proper authority, the county may attach or otherwise affix an permanent addendum to the deed of real property wherein the dump site exists, stating the approximate size and location of the dump on the property and a description of the materials contained therein, as well as the dates such dumping occurred, to be recorded on the property plat as a fill area, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30. The purpose of the attachment is to preserve the health and safety of current and future landowners and users of said properties, to promote the integrity of property description and values, and to record the location of said dumpsites. The county's exercise of its options under this subsection shall in no way be mandatory, and the county or its agents shall not be held liable for exercise of action or inaction nor for the costs of such action or inaction of the remedies set forth in this subsection. See Ga. Admin. Code § 391-3-4-.06. 
(g)	This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2002, § IX) 
Secs. 36-78—36-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER 

Sec. 36-108. - Violations; penalties; presumption. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, or other conveyance, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(c)	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed in lieu of a sentence or fine as outlined in subsection (a) of this section, to pick up and remove from any public street, highway, or right of way, any litter the person has deposited and any litter deposited by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 36-109. - Manner of deposit. 
(a)	No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle or conveyance of any kind, shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, waters, or other public place or upon private property within the county. 
(b)	No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county, unless such truck or vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered, as to prevent any load, contents or litter, from being blown, scattered or in any manner deposited, in or upon any street, sidewalk, or any other public place, or upon private property within the county. 
(c)	No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property, except as provided hereinafter, within the county, except in public or private receptacles intended for the collection of litter. 
(d)	This article shall not be construed to limit persons or entities from storing, maintaining, accumulating, collecting or otherwise possessing litter, as defined in this article, on their own real property, or any other property which they have under their control or possession, and such storing, maintaining, accumulating, or collecting of litter shall not be considered a violation herein. 
(Ord. of 10-16-2008) 
Chapter 40 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Constitution of the State of Georgia as amended, for the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage economically sound and stable land development. 
(2)	To provide the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
(3)	To provide the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
(4)	To assist in wise and equitable handling of all development of land by providing uniform procedures and standards for observation and enforcement of regulations by developers and local public bodies as appropriate. 
(5)	To hold the interests of the county residents as a whole above all other resolutions or statutes which apply to the same subject matter, that the resolution or statute requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern except in cases where the public interest is clearly better served by one resolution or statute over another. 
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not defined here shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. The words "structure" and "building" have the same definition. Words used in the singular include the plural and those used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
Alley or service drive means a public way used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets (other than alleys), river, streams or U.S. government property, regardless of size, shape, or number of lots therein. 
Block corner means the corner of any subdivision block where two streets intersect, or the intersection of the back lot lines of a subdivision at points having a change of direction greater than ten degrees. 
Building setback line means a line across a lot establishing the minimum open space required between buildings and the street right-of-way line. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Duplex means a house divided into two living units. 
Easement means a nonexclusive easement for ingress and egress in perpetuity 
Erosion and sedimentation control means a provision within the resource protection regulations of the state that addresses land disturbing activities and specific methods for the prevention of soil loss. 
Field representative means that person appointed by the county commissioner being assigned the responsibility for administering building permits, soil erosion ordinances and subdivision regulations of the county. The office of the field representative shall act as staff to the planning commission and shall be given full responsibility for receiving applications, fees, and filings from developers and citizens and shall report to the planning commission the ongoing status of the various activities involving soil erosion, building permits and subdivision regulations. 
Green space means property, which is undeveloped; it can be improved with park type amenities but shall not be used for parking drives and roads, swimming pools, tennis courts, or any other impervious surface. The final plat shall define the completed green space use. Green space should be retired from any development or sale should it be available for septic systems. 
Health department means the County Health Department of Towns County, Georgia. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description on a subdivision plat or record survey map or described by metes and bounds and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development, or both. For the purpose of this chapter, a lot shall not include any portion of a street right-of-way. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least eight feet in width and 12 feet in length, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land five acres or more that is occupied or designated for occupancy by four or more mobile homes for nontransient use and which may include services and facilities for the residents. 
Mountain Protection Act means the state law and county ordinance as adopted by the county and enacted for the protection of mountain areas above the elevation of 2,200 feet mean sea level (MSL). All properties above this elevation are subject to all aspects of current state requirements. 
Multifamily means intended for use by several individual families. 
Phasing means to introduce a subdivision for approval in separate stages. 
Planning commission (TCPC) means the Towns County Planning Commission. 
Plat, final, means a drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certifications necessary for recording. 
Plat, preliminary, means a survey showing proposed layout of a subdivision in adequate detail to convey to the planning commission or others the concept and workability of a subdivision, but not complete in form or detail required for recording. 
Roadbed means the graded portion of a road/street within top and side slopes, prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder. 
Roadway means the portion of a road/street within the limits of construction. 
Pavement means any finished road/street surfacing treatment. A final application of asphalt or concrete placed upon a roadbed in accordance with the specifications and requirements as set forth in these regulations. 
Recreational vehicle means a motorized vehicle or an immediate towable travel trailer used for recreational purposes. Any units over 8½ feet in width or which require a special permit from the Department of Transportation for moving are not considered to be RV's. A pitched roof trailer is not considered an RV under this definition. A RV shall not have a removal tong Park model trailers are not included in this definition. A recreational vehicle is no longer an RV if any of the following occurs: 
(1)	Other buildings or rooms are attached. 
(2)	If the unit it tied (strapped) down. 
(3)	If wheels or tires have been removed. 
A recreational vehicle shall have marine type plumbing fixtures throughout and a holding tank. The RV definition allows for unattached porches or decks. 
Recreational vehicle park means a parcel of land five acres or more, on which campsites are established for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for purposes of recreation or vacation. 
Shoulder means the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses. 
Street means a public or dedicated thoroughfare or a private right-of-way or easement shown on a recorded plat and which had been approved by the planning commission. 
Subdivider means the person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined in this section excluding mobile homes , recreational vehicles and travel trailers including any agent of the subdivider or combination thereof. The term "subdivider" is interchangeable with developer. 
Subdivision means a division of a track or parcel of land into four or more lots, building sites or other division for the purpose, whether immediate or future of sale or building development; the process of subdividing land; or the land or area being subdivided. The following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the county; 
(2)	Division of land into parcels of five acres, or more. 
Trout waters. All flowing streams within the county have been designated by the state to be 'trout waters and are subject to the current regulations and requirements of the Watershed Protection Act (anything that runs flowing streams). 
Unattached porch or deck means an open-air structure consisting of a deck which may be enclosed only by installation of screen wire, with or without a roof. Porches shall not be attached to a RV in any manner. A porch shall not contain any plumbing fixtures or permanent electrical hook ups. 
Watershed Protection Act means a state law enacted for the protection of watersheds, including all streams and reservoirs regardless of size are considered trout waters and all properties adjacent to these streams must meet all current regulations and requirements pertaining to trout waters. Further, properties on other waters must meet the current regulations and requirements of the Watershed Protection Act. 
Sec. 40-3. - Jurisdiction for enforcement. 
The boundaries of the area of jurisdiction of this chapter shall be the boundaries of the county, excluding that land which lies within the boundaries of any municipality within the county. The land within these municipalities may be included under this chapter only after legal action is taken by the individual governing bodies of these municipalities to lawfully adopt the resolution from which this chapter is derived. 
Sec. 40-4. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted resolution of the county. Prosecution shall be in the manner and penalty imposed be in accordance with the state law as it pertains to county ordinance violations. 
Sec. 40-5. - Remedies. 
If any county land is used in violation of this chapter, the planning commission, the county commissioner, the county attorney acting for either, or any adjacent property owners who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such land use. 
Sec. 40-6. - Administrative procedures. 
The planning commission may supplement these regulations as necessary with administrative procedures so that the regulations may be more effectively and consistently applied. These administrative procedures must be explicitly recorded in minutes of the planning commission and entered into a booklet entitled "Administrative Procedures of Towns County Planning Commission." 
Sec. 40-7. - Administrative appeal. 
The denial of approval, or the approval with condition of a plat by the planning commission, or the decision that the plat by the planning commission, or the decision that the plat is in violation of this chapter, shall entitle the person submitting the plat to a hearing before the county commissioner within ten days after receipt by the planning commission and county commissioner of written notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain a brief description of the decision being appalled and the name of and address to whom the decision upon the appeal shall be sent. The county commissioner shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the decision upon such appeal by mailing such decision to the person named in the notice of appeal, at the address stated therein, by regular first class mail within ten days of the date of the conclusion of such hearing. 
Sec. 40-8. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the planning commission and county commissioner shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
Secs. 40-9—40-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION, PLATTING JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 40-35. - Plats required. 
Any person proposing to subdivide land within the county shall submit to the planning commission plats of the proposed subdivision, together with all fees, applications and other documents specified by these regulations which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this regulation. 
Sec. 40-36. - New work. 
No person shall proceed with any construction work on a proposed subdivision before obtaining a soil and erosion permit and preliminary plat approval from the planning commission. Any work done on real property within a period of three years from the application for preliminary plat approval cannot be incorporated within the road system or other improvements for subdivision of real property. 
Sec. 40-37. - Platting authority. 
From and after the adoption and enactment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived, the planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county until it shall have been submitted and given final approval by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the appropriately designated person of the planning commission. The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision, which does not have the approval of the planning commission as required by these regulations. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the final approval of the planning commission as required by these regulations is hereby declared a misdemeanor and upon conviction, is punishable as provided by article XIV of these regulations. Exception to this subsection shall be the application of an exemption stamp as affixed by the planning commission or office of the commissioner of the county. 
Sec. 40-38. - Use of plat. 
No person shall advertise or represent any land by reference to or exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision before that plat has received preliminary approval of the planning commission. Further no land shall be transferred and/or recorded until it has been given final approval by the planning commission. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents shall not exempt the transaction from the penalties of these regulations. 
Sec. 40-39. - Erection of buildings. 
All subdivision lots must abut a public street, public access street, private subdivision road or has access thereto. However, if a lot cannot be designed to abut a reference road then a driveway which meets the above referenced frontage requirements may be used to access up to two lots. 
Sec. 40-40. - Acceptance of, improvements in, and requirements as to unapproved streets. 
(a)	The governing authority of the county shall not accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections, or other facilities or utilities in any street within the county unless such street shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal status of a subdivision street prior to the effective date of these regulations or unless such street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a street plat made and adopted by said planning commission; provided, however, that the governing authority of the county may, in its own discretion, within the spirit and intent of these regulations and standards as amended, locate and construct or may accept any other street if the resolution or other measure for such approval be first submitted to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
(b)	This shall not be construed that the county must accept all roads so constructed. Acceptance of roads is a process independent of the planning commission and is at the sole discretion of the commissioner of the county. 
(c)	In addition to the foregoing, after the adoption and enactment of the resolution from which this chapter is derived of which these regulations are a part, the governing authority of the county may require that all streets, located within any subdivision, the plat of which was submitted to and approved by the planning commission after the adoption and enactment of these Regulations, meet the requirements of these regulations or be properly dedicated to public use. 
Sec. 40-41. - Public access. 
A subdivision must abut a public road for a minimum distance of no less than 50 feet. It is preferred that all access from the subdivision to the public road be located on real property owned in fee simple by the developer. However, a subdivision may be served by a perpetual nonexclusive easement for ingress and egress with a minimum width of 50 feet. If the access is not fee simple then the subdivision must also be served by easements for utility services sufficient to provide access for all required utility services, including, but not limited to, electrical power and water and sewer if appropriate. In the event a subdivision is served by an access other than fee simple, the road system of the development will not be considered for acceptance as a county road unless and until fee simple access is obtained by the developer and/or owners of the lots. Notice of this requirement and condition will be placed upon the subdivision plat. 
Sec. 40-42. - Privately maintained streets and roads. 
(a)	The following statement shall be placed on all plats identifying privately maintained roads in the following words: "The roads or streets identified as 'Privately Maintained' are private ways and are not maintained by state, county, city or other public agencies." All roads and streets not accepted by the county shall be designated as "Privately Maintained." 
(b)	All privately maintained roads require specific acceptance for school bus and mail service and where subdivisions have privately maintained roads, a statement whether or not such roads have specifically been approved shall be placed on the plat and the instrument of transfer, deed, or sales contract. 
(c)	The engineering standards shall be for public and private roads as required by section 40-140. All construction of private and public roads shall be completed and certified to prior to final plat approval. 
Secs. 40-43—40-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS 

Sec. 40-73. - Pre-application review. 
Whenever subdivision or a tract of land within Towns County is proposed to be subdivided, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the field representative of the planning commission. The subdivider may present sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision and request advice and guidance concerning the project and the administrative procedures involved. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review and no formal application shall be required. Further, the subdivider shall forward a list (or copy of proposed preliminary plat) to 911 mapping of the county for comparison of road names with existing road names within the county. Any conflict of proposed road names shall be resolved prior to the approval of any final plat. 
Sec. 40-74. - Sequence of administrative procedures. 
Listed below in normal sequential order are the generally occurring steps required to successfully complete development of a subdivision: 
(1)	Pre-application review session with the field representative (sketch plan and general data). 
(2)	Obtain a copy of this chapter and county road specifications and Mountain Protection Act standards. 
(3)	Consult with the county health department to identify any possible water or sewage problems associated with the land proposed for subdividing. 
(4)	Consult with the Natural Resources Conservation Service for assistance in ensuring development land does not propose building sites in flood plains, flood hazard areas and that natural waterways will not be interrupted. Building in a flood hazard zone is allowed provided that the developer provides a flood certificate for each lot, elevation and other construction requirements set forth for construction within a flood hazard zone. Also needs to be tied to building code provisions. 
(5)	Have land surveyed to obtain data for preliminary plat and final plat and to determine how land is to be divided. A developer or surveyor may use and incorporate a prior boundary line survey if same meets the minimum standards set forth for a preliminary and/or final plat approval. 
(6)	Develop preliminary plat with surveyors and submit to planning commission 15 days before meeting at which preliminary plat approval is to be sought. 
(7)	Be prepared to accompany field representative or commission members to development site prior to next commission meeting. 
(8)	Attend the commission meeting at which preliminary plat approval is sought, or send competent representative who can answer questions in your name. No action will be taken by TCPC when no representative is present. 
(9)	Obtain a land-disturbing permit from the appropriate authority when preliminary plat is approved. 
(10)	Begin initial subdivision work. 
(11)	Request inspection of earthwork, and utility work if any, by field representative prior to applying road surface material such as gravel or pavement and before seeding required by conditions of land disturbing permit. 
(12)	Obtain approval for electrical installation from the health department. 
(13)	Complete survey work as required for final plat. 
(14)	Develop final plat for submission to TCPC. 
(15)	Complete road, utility and soil erosion work. 
(16)	Request final planning commission on-site inspection of completed required improvement work. 
(17)	Submit final plat to planning commission office within on or before 15 days before meeting at which approval is sought. Plat must bear all required certificates noted in the ordinance as well as all notations or changes specified by the commission when the preliminary plat was tentatively approved. 
(18)	Attend planning commission meeting at which final plat approval is sought. No action will be taken by TCPC when no representative is present. 
(19)	Ascertained that approved subdivision final plat has been recorded in clerk of superior court office. 
(20)	Proceed to sale of subdivision lots. (If phased development is involved, only lots from final plats of approved phases can be sold in conjunction with any subdivision plat.) 
Sec. 40-75. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the field representative of the planning commission, or his designated representative, at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Five copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as may be specified. 
(3)	Payment of a preliminary plat-filling fee in accordance with the fee schedule attached to these regulations. 
(4)	Prove of submission of proposed road names to 911 mapping of the county. 
Sec. 40-76. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)	The chairman or a designated member of TCPC shall check the plat for compliance with these and other relevant county regulations and ordinances and report findings and recommendations to the TCPC in public session. However, a review and/or of approval of the preliminary plat shall not be construed to mean that the plat meets all requirements as set forth within those regulations. It is the responsibility of the owner or developer to secure all access requirements and comply with all rules and regulations. The planning commission may rely on representations on the plat and those made by developer and/or representatives as being true and correct; however, this reliance does not bind the planning commission to approval or acceptance as to any terms and conditions which may later be determined to be incorrect. 
(b)	No preliminary plat shall be acted upon by TCPC except in public session. Such sessions or hearings must be held at least monthly and are generally held on the second Monday of each month. The field representative is not empowered to act or speak for the TCPC in approving or disapproving preliminary plat requests. 
(c)	TCPC shall take no action on a preliminary plat if the applicant or a designated representative is not present at the hearing. 
(d)	At the public hearing the TCPC shall take one of the following actions, which shall be recorded, with reason for disapproval where appropriate, in the minutes: 
(1)	Approve the preliminary plat. 
(2)	Approve the preliminary plat on conditions that necessary modifications are made (such required modifications must be recorded on the plat and in the minutes). 
(3)	Disapprove the preliminary plat. 
(4)	Table. A vote on a preliminary plat may be tabled twice then the planning commission must take action as set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(e)	The action of the TCPC shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat. One annotated copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider or agent and one copy permanently filed in TCPC records. Both must clearly record approval or disapproval and reasons for disapproval. 
(f)	All preliminary plat approvals shall be limited by these qualifications. 
(1)	The approval is a tentative approval only, pending submission of a final plat. 
(2)	The approval is valid for one year and maybe extended for six months if requested, and shall be null and void after that date. However, all extensions must be requested prior to the expiration of the current approval period. Second six-month extension is only for good cause shown and may not be due to delay of developer). If final plat is not received by the end of this period a new preliminary plat request shall be submitted before a final plat request can be accepted. 
(g)	Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for subdivider to advertise to begin physical improvement to property being subdivided, and to request land disturbing permit. 
(h)	Posting of permits. Before work begins on a subdivision, a copy of the preliminary plat permit along with a copy of the erosion and sediment control permit must be posted at the site in view to eliminate confusion which may arise regarding the obtaining of the proper permits. 
Sec. 40-77. - Preliminary plat specification. 
The preliminary plat shall conform to the following specifications and contain the required information: 
(1)	Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of either 100 feet to one inch or 200 feet to the inch on 17 by 23 sheet. 
(2)	Index map. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet. 
(3)	Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
a.	Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
b.	Proposed name of subdivision. 
c.	North point and graphic scale, date and vicinity map. 
d.	Acreage of the subdivision. 
e.	Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances. 
f.	Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
g.	Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
h.	Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, any land to be used for purposes other than single family dwellings, and proposed provisions for maintenance of streets and other reserved/dedicated areas. The preliminary plat shall include a certificate that the proposed streets will meet all of the requirements contained in section 40-140. 
i.	Block number and lot numbers and total land acreage for each lot. If waterfront lots, plat must state the following and denote the subject setbacks on the subject waterfront lots to wit: buildings may not be constructed on any lot or tract of land within 50 feet of the 1,926-foot elevation above mean sea level of Lake Chatuge. This 50-foot setback is not a horizontal offset, but it is to be measured 50 feet back perpendicular from the 1926-foot contour with the topography (slope) of the land, said 1926-foot elevation being the full pool level of said Tennessee Valley Authority impoundment. 
j.	Provisions of water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
k.	Phased development plats must show all other phases either by an attachment or a sketch map, index map, or boundary line trace on the same sheet as the preliminary plat phase being submitted, including continuation of all streets. 
l.	Copy of all proposed covenants associated with the subdivision. 
(4)	Certification of preliminary plat approval. A certificate of preliminary plat approval by the Planning Commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: "Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Towns County, Georgia, all the requirements of preliminary plat approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given approval by the Towns County Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . This approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This Certification of Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ ." 
Sec. 40-78. - Applications for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission the subdivider may, within one year from tentative approval, unless extension has been approved, submit to the planning commission at least 15 calendar days prior to the next scheduled meeting, the following: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Five paper copies of the final plat and other documents, as may be specified. 
(3)	Payment a of a final plat fee in accordance with the fee schedule attached to these regulations. 
(4)	A complete disclosure on how all utilities, roads and amenities are to be maintained, (including department of housing and urban development property report where appropriate) plus information requested as a result of findings during preliminary review. 
(5)	A copy of all covenants associated with the subdivision. 
(6)	All certifications required. 
Sec. 40-79. - Review of final plat. 
(a)	The chairman or a designated member of TCPC shall check the plat for conformance with the approved/conditionally approved preliminary plat and for compliance with this and other relevant county regulations and ordinances and report findings and recommendations to TCPC in public session. 
(b)	No final plat shall be acted upon by TCPC except in public session. Such sessions or hearings must be held at least monthly. The field representative is not empowered to act or speak for TCPC in approving or disapproving final plat requests. 
(c)	TCPC shall take no action on a final plat if the applicant or a designated representative is not present at the hearing, in which case the 45-day requirement in f. below is automatically waived for 46 days. 
(d)	At a public hearing within 45 days of request for final plat approval, TCPC shall take one of the following actions, which shall be recorded, with reasons for disapproval where appropriate, in the minutes: 
(1)	Approve the final plat. 
(2)	Disapprove the final plat and further notify the subdivider in writing of the specific reasons for disapproval within five days. 
(e)	In order for TCPC to record a final plat, all requirements of these regulations must have been specified. 
(f)	Plats not acted on by TCPC within 45 days of request for approval shall be issued on request to the subdivider. If, however, TCPC determines that additional time is required to study a final plat, an extension of time shall be requested in writing from the subdivider, who may agree to a specific time extension in lieu of plat disapproval. 
(g)	When all conditions for approval of the final plat have been met and such approval has been granted, the TCPC shall endorse and date the certificate of final plat approval on the original copy of the final plat. Such approval and endorsement convey the authority to record the plat and to sell lots shown on the plat. 
(h)	Information to be provided on the final plat. 
(1)	Name and address of owner of record and subdivider. 
(2)	North point, graphic scale and date. 
(3)	Vicinity map. 
(4)	Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or benchmarks or other permanent monuments shall be accurately described on the plat. 
(5)	Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(6)	Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a filed survey, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and angles to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 3,000. 
(7)	Name of subdivision, its acreage, exact location, width, and names of all street rights of way and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat and description of how said streets within the subdivision are to be maintained. 
(8)	Street right-of-way lines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radius, and lengths of tangents. 
(9)	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest 1/100 foot and bearings. 
(10)	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically and total land acreage for each lot. If water front lot, show water acreage separately in parentheses. 
(11)	Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use and boundary line notations disclosing plans for future developments/phasing. 
(12)	Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
(13)	A description, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
(14)	a.	A certificate by the surveyor or engineer that all construction of roads and other infrastructure has been completed and meets all the requirements of this ordinance and the terms as to subdivision being served by a perpetual nonexclusive easement, if appropriate (see section 40-41 for language). The certificate shall also contain a statement as to whether or not any of the property is located within the Mountain Protection Act. 
b.	In lieu of having the road paving completed, the developer may file a payment and performance bond in the amount of not less than $33.00 per running foot (three-inch/two-inch) of road to be paved, guaranteeing the completion of the paving within 12 months. In place of bond, the developer may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a banking institution within Towns County in favor of the county in an aggregate amount totaling 120 percent of the amount which would be due pursuant to the above referenced calculations. Said bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be for the period of one year). The paving or other work to be completed must be accomplished within the term of the letter of credit or bond. 
(15)	Each plat shall have the 100 by 100 feet square denoted on the plat and upon each lot as required by section 40-168 shown on each lot. 
Sec. 40-80. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of a final plat, the chairman of the planning commission or his designated representative shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of submitting the final plat. 
(1)	Scale. The Final Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of either 100 feet to one inch or 200 feet to one inch on 17 by 23 sheet. 
(2)	Index map. Where more than one sheet is required an index map shall be included and lettered alphabetically. The index map shall indicate the total land acreage for each lot and, if the lot is a waterfront lot, the water acreage shall be shown separately. 
Sec. 40-81. - Certifications required. 
The following certifications are required. 
(1)	An engineer or surveyor certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that the plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as 'future', and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown" 

 
(2)	Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Towns 
"The Owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that all taxes on this plat have been paid in full. 

 
(3)	Health department approval of sanitary sewers. 
(4)	Road supervisors' approval of roads. 
(5)	Erosion and sedimentation approval. 
(6)	Water supply and distribution system approval. 
(7)	A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, directly on the plat, as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Resolution of Towns County, Georgia, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the Towns County Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , and said plat is released for recording and for use in sale of land described hereon" 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ 
Chairman, Towns County Planning Commission 
Secs. 40-82—40-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-106. - Suitability of the land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use that will contribute to danger to health, safety, or property destruction shall not be subdivided, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. All land falling into 100-year flood zone must be so identified on the preliminary and final plats and no building permits will be issued within said zone with the exception of flood zone section 401(d). 
Sec. 40-107. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in the county. 
Sec. 40-108. - Access. 
For provisions regarding access, see section 40-41. 
Sec. 40-109. - Community assets. 
In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, and water courses, as water courses, as well as for historical sites and similar community assets. These, when preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property or community. 
Sec. 40-110. - Comprehensive group housing and developments. 
(a)	Comprehensive group housing and developments such as duplex, multifamily units or condominiums shall be constructed on a minimum three-acre plot of ground suitable for developments. Property on Lake Chatuge which lies below the 1933 contour shall not be included for proposes of determining ground suitable for development. 
(1)	With respect to developments, which will be served by both public water and sewer, such development may be developed with a density that will not exceed six units per acre, not to exceed two stories above ground, not including basement, including construction of two or more buildings together with the necessary drives and access ways and which is not sub-divided into the customary lots, blocks and streets, may be approved by the planning commission. If in the opinion of the planning commission, the departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations a variance may be granted. 
(2)	With respect to developments which will not be served by both public water and sewer, such development may be developed with a density that will not exceed four (4) units per acre, not to exceed two stories above ground, more buildings together with the necessary drives and access ways and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks and streets, may be approved by the planning commission. If in the opinion of the planning commission, the departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations, a variance may be granted. 
(3)	There shall be a least two parking places provision for each unit and at least two parking places for each three units or fraction thereof for visitor parking. 
(4)	Developments that are not to be a public private or alternative sewer system approved by the Health shall include a septic system replacement area equal to 100 percent of what is required by the health department. 
(5)	Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to and be approved by the planning commission. No sales or contracts shall be made until preliminary approval has been given. 
(b)	Cluster developments. In order to qualify for this prevision there must be a minimum of seven suitable acres in the development. All single family dwelling developments shall be designed with a density not to exceed four units per acre, when served with public sewage, 2½ units per acre when not on public sewage. Not to exceed two stories above ground, not including below ground basement and shall abut a public or approved private street with not less than 30 feet of frontage. 
(1)	All cluster and multifamily developments must have lender approval certification prior to final plat approval indicating the lender is loaning money for the project subject to this ordinance. 
(2)	All housing including cluster and multifamily located on Lake Chatuge shall have a set back of 20 feet from the 1933 contour. 
(3)	There shall be no more than 60 units in a group in deciding density. 
(4)	All cluster developments shall have at least 20 percent of the property dedicated to green space and a site plan for the development must be presented at the time the preliminary plat is presented. 
Secs. 40-111—40-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 40-134. - Streets within subdivision. 
All streets within a subdivision shall to meet the minimum standards specified by section 40-140. 
Sec. 40-135. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
Sec. 40-136. - Street names. 
All streets within a subdivision shall be named and posted with signage in the same configuration as county roads. Subdivider shall bear the expense of said signage. Further, all roads which are bisected by the main access road shall bear either different names for each portion of said road or have the name designated in such a way that the different street locations can be distinguished by 911 and emergency vehicles for directions in response to emergency service calls. In no case shall the name from proposed streets duplicate existing street names, regardless of the use of the Suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, way or court. Through its index list of street names on file the planning commission can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication. 
Sec. 40-137. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 25 feet shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 40-138. - Cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets. 
All dead-end streets or courts designated to have one end permanently closed shall be provided with a turn-around at the closed end. 
Sec. 40-139. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments. 
Sec. 40-140. - Street right-of-way. 
The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. All subdivision streets, public or public access, shall be platted as right-of-way. No streets shall be platted on the basis of a private easement. Minimum street right-of-way requirements for roads, shall be as follows: 
(1)	Public streets. 
a.	Right-of-way. minimum of 50 feet (30 feet cleared of all trees). 
b.	Roadbed. Minimum of 24 feet (pavement width plus six feet shoulder width even with the road, three feet on either side with appropriate ditches). 
c.	Slope. The percent of slope at any point along the road shall not exceed a constant grade of 18 percent or grade of no more than 20 percent for a distance of no more than 200 feet. 
d.	Pavement. Minimum of 18 feet wide. 
e.	All roads must be paved with a minimum of eight-inch and six-inch depth of compacted base; 3.5-inch asphalt followed by a bituminous tack coat and 1.5 of asphalt topping. 
f.	No private roads will be accepted by the county until such time as they are paved and meet all other requirements. 
g.	All curves in the road including switch back will have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
(2)	Private roads. 
a.	Right-of-way should meet a minimum of 50 feet (30 feet cleared of all trees). 
b.	Roadbed. Minimum of 24 feet (pavement width plus six feet shoulder width, three feet on either side with appropriate ditches). 
c.	Slope. No more than 25 percent grade with a possibility of a hardship variance if deemed necessary. 
d.	Pavement. Minimum of 16 feet and constructed to the same specifications for base and paving as required for public roads. 
e.	No private roads will be accepted by the county until such time as they are paved and meet all other requirements. 
f.	The final plat and deeds shall contain a statement that the roads in this subdivision are private and will never be accepted by the county until such time as they meet all the requirements of the county subdivision ordinance in existence at the time of the request. Further the plat will denote that because of the limited width and allowance for greater slope that all public services, including emergency services, may be limited in their ability to access or serve the lots and improvements thereon. 
(3)	Roads for subdivisions of 35 lots or less. All requirements for public or private roads exist, as the status is to be determined during the plat approval process, however; in developments with 35 or less total lots, including all phases, the developer may wait until 75 percent of the lots are sold, or three years, whichever shall first occur, before completing the paving requirements. the developer is required to post a bond or irrevocable letter of credit as referenced in section 40-79(h)(14)b. 
(4)	One way roads and single lane roads. roads for which travel is limited to a single direction shall meet all the requirements for road construction for public and private roads as pertaining to base and paving; however, such roads may have 12 feet of paving and limited to a 25-foot right-of-way. 
(5)	Cul-de-sac: turnaround, right-of-way. A radius of 40 feet of pavement for a total diameter of 80 feet as measured from the center of the circle with all shoulders and specifications as noted for all other pavement and road construction. 
(6)	Variance may be granted and acceptable justification is submitted, however, the county road standards will be routinely employed in all but severe cases. 
Sec. 40-141. - Additional width on existing streets. 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate or reserve right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements. 
(1)	The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
(2)	When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
Sec. 40-142. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at any angle of less than 75 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. 
Secs. 40-143—40-167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES 

Sec. 40-168. - Lot sizes. 
Lot dimensions shall be at least: front 30 feet along a subdivision street or public road: the back lot lines shall be not less than 60 feet in width; and a minimum square area within the building setback lines shall be at least 100 feet by 100 feet. The density shall not be greater than one lot per three-fourths acre. 
(1)	Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building set back requirements from both abutting streets. 
(2)	All lots within the Mountain Protection Act shall comply with all terms and conditions for lots as provided in that ordinance. 
Sec. 40-169. - Building lines. 
Front building setback lines shall be at least 20 feet from street right-or-way line and the side building setback lines shall be at least ten feet from the side property line. Corner lots shall meet front building line set back on all sides facing streets. Rear building lines shall not be closer than 20 feet from the rear property line. However, as to lots which front on Lake Chatuge, these setbacks are modified such that buildings may not be constructed on any lot or tract of land within 50 feet of the 1,926-foot. Elevation above mean sea level of Lake Chatuge, this 50-foot setback is not a horizontal offset, but it is to be measured 50 feet back perpendicular from the 1,926-foot contour with the topography (slope) of the land, said 1,926 foot elevation being the full pool level of said Tennessee Valley Authority impoundment. 
Sec. 40-170. - Panhandle or flag lots. 
Panhandle or flag lots, are discouraged, but a maximum of three per cul-de-sac may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impracticable. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 30 feet wide, and the panhandle access shall not be more that 200 feet long. Set back line shall be shown on plat. 
Secs. 40-171—40-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 40-194. - Performance and specifications. 
Every subdivider shall be required to make the improvements outlines in this article in accordance with the specifications herein or otherwise adopted by the county. The necessity for storm drainage on each site will be determined by the soil and erosion permit. 
Sec. 40-195. - Monuments. 
(a)	Permanent monuments shall be placed on at least 2 locations within each subdivision for reference. Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete with dimensions of at least 4" × 4" × 24" with metal center pins of one-quarter-inch diameter and four-inch length. After installation the top of the monument shall be six inches above the finished grade. 
(b)	Lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be six inches above the finished grade. 
Sec. 40-196. - Storm drainage. 
An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross-drain shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway (roadway is defined as the portion of a road or street within the limits of construction) and the required slopes. The size of pipe to be provided shall be engineeringly determined, but in no case shall the pipe diameter be less than 15 inches and shall be constructed of galvanized steel. 
Sec. 40-197. - Installation of utilities and driveways. 
After grading is completed and approve and before any base is applied, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. 
Sec. 40-198. - Water supply system. 
(a)	Water mains within the subdivision must be provided with connections to each lot if a community or public water system is used. If a public water supply is used it shall meet the requirements of the local waste authority applicable. 
(b)	If a municipal water supply is not within 1,000 feet to the subdivision at the time of development of the subdivision, then the developer shall provide an adequate water source. This shall be accomplished by the use of individual wells for each housing unit or by a community water system with adequate storage facility. Individual wells are the responsibility of the lot purchaser, however, the community (subdivision) water system shall provide a minimum flow of 300 gallons per day per unit, shall be sanitary, and shall have a minimum residual pressure of 30 pounds per square inch at each unit in the subdivision. The community water system shall be installed by a Georgia Licensed Driller and water is approved by the county health officer. Quality shall meet state safe drinking water act and a copy of sample report to accompany application. 
Sec. 40-199. - Sanitary sewers. 
If public sewage disposal facilities are more than 500 feet to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks, an oxidation pond, or another approved method of treatment of sanitary sewerage shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for use, in conformity with the requirements of the county health department. 
Secs. 40-200—40-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 40-222. - Hardship. 
Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations due to unusual topographic or other conditions beyond the control of the subdivider, upon due consideration, it may recommend to the commissioner that a variance in the regulations be granted so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided, however, that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of these regulations. Any recommendation for variance is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the planning commission. 
Sec. 40-223. - Comprehensive group housing development. 
(a)	When located on public sewer and water. Comprehensive group housing developments such as duplex or multifamily units shall be constructed on a minimum three-acre plot of ground suitable for development that will not exceed four units per acre, not to exceed two stories above ground, not including basement, including construction of two or more buildings together with the necessary drives and access ways, and which is not subdivided into the customary lots, blocks and streets, may be approved by the planning commission. If in the opinion of the commission the departure from the foregoing regulations can be made without destroying the intent of the regulations. 
(b)	Developments that are not to be on a public private or alternative sewer system approved by the health department shall include a septic system replacement area equal to 100 percent of what is required by the health department. 
(c)	Plans for all such developments shall be submitted to and be approved by the planning commission. No sales or contracts shall be made until final approval has been given. 
(d)	There shall be a least two parking places provided for each unit and at least two parking places for each three units or fraction thereof for visitor parking. 
Sec. 40-224. - Conditions. 
In recommending the granting of variances, modifications, and approval for experimental subdivisions and group housing developments, the planning commission shall require such conditions as well, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied, modified, or approved. They shall include without being limited to: personal, surety, performance, or maintenance bonds, affidavits, covenants, or other legal instruments. 
Sec. 40-225. - Justification of variances. 
The burden of proof and/or justification of a need for a variance from these written documents and/or supporting graphics. The appropriate request for variance must be completed and attached. No variances shall be permitted which would nullify the intent of these standard and the adopted policies of the planning commission. Variance requests must be submitted be submitted before any work to accomplish variance-related or noncompliance improvements begin unless the need for variance was not apparent prior to work and can be shown that work was halted when the need for variance was noted. 
Sec. 40-226. - Exemption for bona fide intra-family transfers. 
(a)	The planning commissions shall grant an exemption from any provision of this chapter where the activity to which the subdivision regulations apply is a bona fide intra-family transfer. 
(b)	Bona fide intra-family transfer is hereby defined as follows: 
(1)	Conveyance by warranty deed or quitclaim deed with consideration recited in the deed as "love and affection." 
(2)	The granter and grantee are both one or more persons who are related as follows: 
a.	Parent and child; 
b.	Brother and brother, sister and sister and/or brother and sister; 
c.	Grandparent and grandchild; or 
d.	Aunt/uncle and niece/nephew; and 
e.	Husband and wife 
(3)	The conveyance meets all other applicable criteria for a variance under this chapter. 
(4)	The purpose of the conveyance is not to subdivide property for sale or resale to persons not listed in subsection (b)(2) of this section or to otherwise circumvent the provisions of this chapter and the applicant so states by sworn verification. 
Sec. 40-227. - Nonresidential development. 
The planning commission may waive all or part of articles V and VI of this chapter, subject to health department approval for any plat or plan submitted for nonresidential development. Such developments may include, but are not limited to, hotels, motels, shopping centers, office parks and commercial resorts. 
Secs. 40-228—40-247. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MOBILE HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 

Sec. 40-248. - Purpose of article. 
This article is intended to cover those parks where the lots will be rented or leased. No individual lot in any park may be sold, or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and park shall meet all requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 40-249. - Renting of spaces. 
No spaces to be rented until final approval by the planning commission. 
Sec. 40-250. - Minimum design standards. 
(a)	Mobile home parks. 
(1)	The minimum land area of any mobile home park shall be seven acres, suitable for development. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 18,000 square feet subject to health department approval if separate individual sewage disposal facilities are located within the bounds of the mobile home space; in cases where shared, or central sewage disposal facilities are utilized, the space size may be reduced to 11,000 square feet. All mobile home space lot lines and the type of sewage disposal proposed for each space shall be clearly delineated on a site plan prior to approval by the planning commission. 
(2)	No mobile home within the park shall be located closer than ten feet to adjoining property lines and the from setback for each mobile home shall be at least 20 feet from the front lot line. 
(3)	Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 20 feet. 
(4)	Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces per each mobile home lot and two additional spaces provided for each three units per visitor. 
(5)	All mobile home lots shall abut upon interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have not less than a 30-foot right-of-way and have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(6)	Review for conformance with current county regulations for road construction. All interior streets within the park shall be graded and based in accordance with county standards. If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan-profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. All streets shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide plus a four-foot shoulder on either side. All curves and cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
(7)	Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the county water authority, when appropriate water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of a site plan to the planning commission. 
(b)	Recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks: minimum design standards and restrictions. 
(1)	The minimum land area of any recreational vehicle or travel trailer park shall be five acres, suitable for development. Each space within the park shall have a minimum finished (excluding slope) area of not less than 3,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. 
(2)	Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street, or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved by the planning commission. 
(3)	Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 30 feet of street frontage, and shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet. 
(4)	Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of one parking space per each travel trailer lot. 
(5)	All travel trailer lots shall abut upon an interior streets. All interior street shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(6)	All interior streets within the park shall be graded, stabilized, and covered with a dust-free material, which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. All streets shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide with a four-foot shoulder on either side. All curves and culs-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet. 
(7)	If lots are to be sold for private ownership, they shall meet all requirements of sections 40-37 and 40-38 shall apply and covenants governing the conditions and restrictions of the park shall be submitted. 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; county sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for county to assess and collect excise taxes on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel/motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist camp or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right or access, license, agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel/motel in the unincorporated areas of the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel/motel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, or any guest room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days. 
Rent means the consideration or value received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 42-20. - Penalty and interest. 
(a)	When any operator fails to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. 
(b)	The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the county in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. 
(c)	In the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the governing authority of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(d)	In addition to the penalties set forth herein, the operator, in the event of the operator's failure to pay tax when due, shall pay interest on the total amount of delinquent taxes at the rate of 8½ percent per annum. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 11) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58. 
Secs. 42-21—42-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 42-42. - Registration of operator required. 
(a)	Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel or motel in the unincorporated area of the county shall immediately register said business with the chief tax assessor of the county on a form provided by the assessor for such purpose. 
(b)	The application for registration shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the county tax commissioner. 
(c)	The application for registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person, by an officer, if a corporation, or a partner, if a partnership. 
(d)	A separate application for registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 42-43. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as provided in this division, the tax assessor shall issue to the operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on the occupant. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 8) 
Secs. 42-44—42-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEVY AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 42-75. - Rate of levy. 
Each occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within the unincorporated area of the county shall pay a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 4; Res. of 3-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority for levy of tax by county and maximum rates, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 42-76. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be levied under this division for: 
(1)	Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)	The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)	Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection. For purpose of the exemption provided under this subsection, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)	Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, §§ 4, 6; Res. of 3-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 42-77. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the unincorporated area of the county to collect the tax on occupants as imposed herein. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 5) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 42-78. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction from the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 10) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 42-79. - Due date; report; transfer of funds. 
(a)	All taxes levied by this section shall be due and payable to the county tax commissioner monthly, on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for a period, and such other information as may be required by the county tax commissioner or the county commissioner. 
(b)	Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent documents of whatever media, setting for the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, and such other information as the county may require. 
(c)	No later than the 15th day of each month, the tax commissioner shall transfer to the general county fund such excise taxes as have been paid. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 42-80. - Application of tax proceeds. 
The proceeds of the tax will be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 7-6-1995, § 12; Res. of 11-2-2007) 
Secs. 42-81—42-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal corporation taxes on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 42-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 8-19-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 42-107. - Levy. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance 
(Res. of 8-19-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Limitation on tax rate that may be imposed by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(d). 
Chapter 44 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq. 

Sec. 44-1. - Speed detection device authorized. 
The law enforcement officers of the county are authorized to use speed detection devices as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
(Res. of 5-11-1992) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by county law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that county obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Chapter 46 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 46-19. - Applicability. 
These regulations shall govern all land within all unincorporated portions of the county. 
(Res. of 6-17-1993, § 103) 
Sec. 46-20. - Rules and regulations. 
The county adopts the rules and regulations relative to on-site sewage management that have been and may from time to time be adopted by the county board of health under O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-4 and 31-5-1. 
(Res. of 6-17-1993, § 104) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in the compilation of this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia law. 

 