THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF JACKSON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: January 11, 2010  Effective: January 11, 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF 
JACKSON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Hunter Bicknell, Chairman 
Tom Crow, District 1 
Chas Hardy, District 2 
Bruce Yates, District 3 
Dwain Smith, District 4 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Darrell Hampton 
County Manager/County Clerk 
____________ 
Julius Hulsey 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Ericka Johnson 
Deputy Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Jackson County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Deborah J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to the Deputy Clerk, Ms. Ericka Johnson, County Manager, Mr. Darrell Hampton, and County Attorney, Julius Hulsey, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of Jackson County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Jackson County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Jackson County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Jackson County, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO: ORD-10-01 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR JACKSON COUNTY, GEORGIA; RE-ADOPTING THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE OF JACKSON COUNTY AS A PART OF THE NEW CODE; READOPTING THE ZONING MAPS OF JACKSON COUNTY; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "CODE OF ORDINANCES OF JACKSON COUNTY, GEORGIA," or "JACKSON COUNTY CODE," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38 and Appendix A, each inclusive, is adopted which Code includes the Unified Development Code of Jackson County; 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 3, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed, except that all zoning ordinances and text changes to the Unified Development Code adopted after that date are hereby ratified and readopted as a part of this Code; 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance, except for zoning ordinances and text changes adopted under the Unified Development Code signed August 3, 2009. 
Section 4. Except to the extent that additional or different penalties are expressly provided for in the Code, as adopted hereby, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in Chapter 1. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue in addition to and not in lieu of, other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of license or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinance adopted after August 3, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The official Zoning Map of Jackson County, Georgia ("Zoning Map") is hereby readopted pursuant to Section 202 of the Unified Development Code of Jackson County. The Zoning Map shall be signed by the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners and attested by the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners as of the date of the new Code is adopted hereby. Copies of the Zoning Map shall be kept in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners and the Zoning Offices as provided for in the Code. 
Section 8. Readoption of the Unified Development Code and the Official Zoning Map of Jackson County have been duly advertised in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Law and adopted after a public hearing. O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Section 9. This ordinance shall become effective January 11, 2010. 
Passed and adopted by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners this 11 day of January, 2010 

Attest: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1999 Ga. Laws, page 3581, which provides for a board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which county governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; election, term and compensation of county officers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

Sec. 1. - [Established.] 
There shall be a board of commissioners of Jackson County to be elected and organized as provided for in this act [article]. The board of commissioners shall constitute the governing authority of Jackson County and shall exercise the powers, duties and responsibilities vested in and upon said officers by the provisions of this act [article]. The term "board," whenever used in this act [article], shall mean the board of commissioners of Jackson County, including the chairperson and all members. 
Sec. 2. - [Membership.] 
(a)	The board of commissioners of Jackson County shall consist of a chairperson and four district commissioners. The four district commissioners shall be residents of their respective commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section and shall be elected by the electors of their respective commissioner districts as provided in section 3 of this act [article]. The chairperson shall be elected at large as provided in section 3 of this act [article]. 
(b)	For the purpose of electing members of the board of commissioners, Jackson County shall be divided into four commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected for each such district. Those districts shall consist of the described territory of Jackson County contained in the description attached to this Act and made a part hereofn and further identified as: Plan Name: jackccp4 Plan Type: Local User: Staff Administrator: Jackson. 
(c)	When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Jackson County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Jackson County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 192), page 4030, § 1)) 
Sec. 3. - [Eligibility for office.] 
(a)	No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 or any other general law. 
(b)	In order to be elected as a member of the board for a commissioner district, a person must be 21 years of age or older, must reside in that district, must have resided in Jackson County for at least 12 months prior to election to such office, and must receive the requisite number of the votes cast for that office by the electors of that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(c)	The chairperson of the board must be 25 years of age or older, must have resided in Jackson County for at least 12 months prior to election to such office, may reside anywhere within Jackson County, and must receive the requisite number of the votes cast for such office by the electors of the entire county. The chairperson must continue to reside within Jackson County during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
Sec. 4. - [Elections.] 
(a)	At the general election held in November of 2000, the chairperson and commissioners from all commissioner districts shall be elected. The chairperson and commissioners from commissioner districts one and two elected in 2000 shall take office on the first day of January in the year following their election and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The commissioners from commissioner districts three and four elected in 2000 shall take office on the first day of January in the year following their election and shall serve initial terms of two years until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Those and all future successors to the chairperson and commissioners from commissioner districts whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the general statewide election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office on the first day of January in the year following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years until their successors are duty elected and qualified. 
(b)	The chairperson and all members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the Georgia Election Code. 
Sec. 5. - [Vacancies.] 
(a)	In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the board on or after the date the first members of the board take office, whether the vacancy is in the office of chairperson or any other member, for any reason other than expiration of term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in this section. 
(b)	In the event a vacancy occurs on the board of commissioners when at least 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the election superintendent of Jackson County, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, shall issue the call for a special election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special election shall be called and conducted as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. Any person elected in a special election to fill such a vacancy shall take office immediately upon certification of the results of such special election and qualification. If such vacancy is in the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners, the vice-chairperson of the board shall exercise the powers and duties of the chairperson for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending on the date the successor chairperson takes office for the remainder of the unexpired term following the special election provided for in this subsection. 
(c)	In the event a vacancy occurs on the board of commissioners when less than 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the remaining members of the board of commissioners shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any person appointed by the board to fill a vacancy as provided in this subsection shall possess the residence and other qualifications required for the office and shall take office immediately upon appointment and qualification. If such vacancy is in the office of chairperson of the board of commissions, the vice-chairperson of the board shall exercise the powers and duties of the chairperson for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending on the date the successor chairperson takes office for the remainder of the unexpired term following his or her appointment as provided for in this subsection. 
(d)	A vice-chairperson serving as chairperson shall not be authorized to vote as a member of the board of commissioners during such service unless the vice-chairperson's vote would affect the outcome of any vote or issue before the board. 
Sec. 6. - [Oath; bonds.] 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairperson and commissioners shall subscribe an oath before the judge of the probate court of said county for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition, the chairperson and each commissioner shall further give a satisfactory surety bond to the judge of the probate court of the county and payable to the judge of the probate court or that judge's successor in office and filed in the office of the judge of the probate court, in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The costs of said bonds shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
Sec. 7. - [Salaries; reimbursement of expenses.] 
(a)	Commissioners, other than the chairperson, shall serve on a part-time basis and be paid a salary of $10,000.00 per annum. Such compensation shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Jackson County. Each such commissioner shall also receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred for travel in the performance of his or her duties which have been approved in advance, in writing, by the chairperson, upon presentation of a signed voucher setting forth the expenses incurred in such travel. 
(b)	The chairperson shall serve in such capacity on a part-time basis and shall be paid a salary of $15,000.00 per annum. Such compensation shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Jackson County. The chairperson shall also receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred for travel in the performance of his or her duties. 
Sec. 8. - [Vice-chairperson.] 
At the first regular meeting of each year, the board of commissioners shall elect from its members a vice-chairperson. In the event of death, disqualification or resignation of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties and exercise the authority of the chairperson until a new chairperson is chosen as provided in this act [article]. The vice-chairperson shall preside at meetings of the board of commissioners in the absence of the chairperson and shall serve for the calendar year in which elected. In the event of a vacancy in the office of vice-chairperson, the board of commissioners shall elect a new vice-chairperson to serve for the remainder of the calendar year. 
Sec. 9. - [Meetings; quorum.] 
The board of commissioners shall hold one regular meeting each month at the county seat, which meeting shall be open to the public. The time, date and place of the meetings shall be determined by the board in the first meeting of the year. Any resolution passed by the board regarding the date, time and place of its monthly meetings shall be published in the official county organ once a week for two weeks during a period of 30 days immediately following the passage of the resolution. The board of commissioners may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairperson or any three commissioners, provided, all members of the board of commissioners shall have been notified of such special meeting which is open to the public. Any three commissioners or the chairperson and any two commissioners shall constitute a quorum. No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least three members of the board of commissioners and except upon compliance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14 [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], relating to open meetings. The chairperson shall be entitled to vote on any question or issue before the board and may make or second any motion before the board. All regular and called meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order. 
(2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 175), page 3923, § 1) 
Editor's note— Please see § 2-40 for dates and times of scheduled meetings. 
Sec. 10. - [Duties of chairperson.] 
The chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the board of commissioners. The duties of the chairperson shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Calling meetings of the board as provided in section 9 of this act [article]; 
(2)	Presiding at meetings of the board; 
(3)	Representing the county government at ceremonial functions; 
(4)	Being empowered to submit motions to the board of commissioners for action; 
(5)	Appointing members and chairpersons to all committees of the board with the approval of the board; and 
(6)	Performing such other duties as shall be delegated to the chairperson by the board of commissioners or as provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 11. - [Powers and authority of board.] 
The board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, policies, rules and regulations governing all matters reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction. Such policies, rules and regulations, when so adopted with proper entry thereof made on the minutes of the board of commissioners, shall be conclusive and binding. The board of commissioners shall exercise only those administrative powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its functions as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions. The following powers are vested in the board of commissioners and reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction: 
(1)	To levy taxes; 
(2)	To make appropriations; 
(3)	To fix rates and charges for services provided by the county; 
(4)	To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)	To order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)	To authorize and provide for the execution of contracts; 
(7)	To establish, alter, open, close, build, repair or abolish public roads, bridges and ferries, according to law; provided, however, that the chairperson shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the board of commissioners for subdivisions have been met; 
(8)	To accept, for the county, the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of the county; 
(9)	To exercise all powers, duties and authority in respect to zoning and planning; 
(10)	To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; 
(11)	To fix the bonds of county officers where the same are not fixed by statute; 
(12)	To enact any ordinances or other legislation which the county may be given authority to enact; 
(13)	To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(14)	To call elections for the voting of bonds; 
(15)	Except as otherwise provided in this act [article], to exercise all of the powers and authority which may be delegated by law to the governing authority of the county, by whatever name designated; and 
(16)	To appoint retained legal counsel and an independent county auditor and provide for their compensation. 
Sec. 12. - [Purchases over $5,000.00.] 
Formal sealed bids shall be received for all purchases in amounts over $5,000.00. Advertisements for such bids shall be published for two consecutive weeks in the official organ of Jackson County. The need for such bids may be dispensed with by the board of commissioners if it decides that an emergency exists which will not permit a delay. 
(Res. No. 06-003, 4-3-1006; 2007 Ga. Laws page 4403) 
Sec. 13. - [Internal organization.] 
The internal organization of the county government shall be established and altered by the board of commissioners. Existing departments may be abolished and their functions transferred to other departments, additional departments may be created, and any two or more departments may be consolidated. 
Sec. 14. - [County manager.] 
The board of commissioners shall employ a county manager having at least a bachelor's degree in public administration or a related field or at least five years' experience as a county manager or city manager. The county manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners, shall receive such salary as determined by the board of commissioners, shall not be an elected official of any county or municipality, and shall have the following duties, powers and authority: 
(1)	To supervise the administration of the affairs of the county and to see that the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the board of commissioners and the laws of the state are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)	To employ and remove all department heads of the county under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners and staff employees of the county manager, pursuant to policies established by the board, except for the county attorney, county auditor and members of all the boards, commissions and authorities who shall be appointed and removed by the board of commissioners pursuant to law or county ordinance; 
(3)	To exercise managerial authority and supervision over the county manager's staff and all department heads under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners; 
(4)	To require reports from heads of departments and other employees entrusted with administrative duties or exercising discretion. The county manager shall have at all times the authority to examine all books and records of every officer and department of the county under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners; 
(5)	To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, with a right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote, and to prepare an agenda of both new and unresolved business for each meeting; 
(6)	To recommend to the board of commissioners for adoption such measures as the county manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)	To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person, company or corporation with the county for work done for the board of commissioners; 
(8)	To submit to the board of commissioners for approval, prior to July 31 of each year, a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year, showing budget revenues and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year; appropriations and estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; recommended salaries; proposed capital expenditures; recommended tax levies; and such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the board of commissioners; 
(9)	To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county; 
(10)	To make, or cause to be made, a full written report to the board of commissioners each month, showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the county government for the preceding month; 
(11)	To serve as or designate a personnel director in the supervision and administration of the county's personnel system for county employees; 
(12)	To delegate purely administrative duties to department heads or subordinates in the county government whose work the county manager shall supervise and direct; provided, however, that the delegation or assignment of duties to subordinates shall not relieve the county manager from the responsibility for administration of county affairs; 
(13)	To act as the clerk of the board of commissioners of Jackson County, with the authority to delegate the administrative duties of such position; 
(14)	To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this act [article] or as may, from time to time, be required by the board of commissioners; and 
(15)	To cooperate with elected and appointed county officers in the management of the county's affairs. 
Editor's note— By local rule, the county manager is allowed to expend funds up to $20,000. 
Sec. 15. - [Minutes book.] 
The clerk of the board of commissioners shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes. The book of minutes of the board of commissioners shall contain all the acts, orders and proceedings of the board of commissioners, in chronological order. The minutes book of the board of commissioners shall be open to the public for inspection at all times during regular office hours; and certified copies of any entries in the minutes book shall be furnished by the clerk to any person requesting same, upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as are other funds, to be assessed by the board of commissioners in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
Sec. 16. - [Budgets and audits.] 
(a)	The county will comply with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 81 [O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.] relating to local government budgets and audits, as well as the following provisions of this section. 
(b)	At the time the proposed budget is submitted to the board, the county manager shall cause to be published in the official organ of Jackson County a copy of the proposed budget, along with the public notices required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5(c). It shall be the duty of the board to hold a meeting at the time and place specified in the notice for the purpose of conducting such public hearing. The board shall review the proposed budget at such public hearing and may adopt the same as submitted by the county manager or make such amendments thereto as the board may deem necessary to maintain the county in sound financial condition. The board may continue the hearing on the proposed budget from time to time, but the time of and the place where the hearing is continued shall be publicly announced at the previous hearing. The board shall adopt the proposed budget as submitted or as amended by the board as the budget for the county for the following fiscal year prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year to which it applies. 
(c)	The final budget adopted by the board shall constitute the board's appropriations of all funds for the fiscal year covered by the budget. The budget may be amended during the fiscal year which it covers, upon the board's taking formal action for such purpose at a regular meeting of the board. Prior to taking such action, the board shall cause to be published in the official organ of Jackson County, a notice setting forth the proposed changes in the budget and a summary of the reasons therefor. Said notice shall also state the time and place of the regular meeting of the board at which action to amend the budget is to be taken. Said notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of the meeting. No increase in appropriations shall be made without provision also being made to finance such increase. 
(d)	A copy of the final budget adopted by the board and any amendment to, or revision of, the budget shall be transmitted by the county manager to the grand jury of the superior court of Jackson County then in session. 
Sec. 17. - [Expenditures.] 
No expenditures of county funds shall be made, except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the board of commissioners. The county manager shall enforce compliance with this provision by all departments of county government and, to this end, shall institute a system of allotments of all moneys appropriated and budgeted. 
Sec. 18. - [Annual continuous audit.] 
The board of commissioners shall, on or before the final day of the month following the end of each fiscal year, employ a certified public accountant for the making of an annual continuous audit of county finances and financial records. The accountant so employed shall be paid out of county funds and shall perform a complete audit of the financial records of the county for the preceding year, pointing out any irregularities found to exist, and reporting the results of such audit to the board of commissioners. Each annual report submitted to the board of commissioners shall be made available for public inspection as are other records in such office. The board of commissioners shall cause to be published in the official organ of Jackson County, and posted at the courthouse door, a statement of the financial condition of the county as of December 31 and June 30 of each year. Said accountant shall transmit to the grand jury of the superior court of Jackson County a copy of each annual report furnished by said accountant to the board of commissioners. 
ARTICLE II. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1800, which amended the state constitution to provide for an industrial development authority. The amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4702. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [Generally.] 
Article VII, section VII, paragraph V, of the constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
A.	Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Jackson County, Georgia, to be known as the "Jackson County Industrial Development Authority," which shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and which, in this amendment, is hereafter referred to as the "authority." 
B.	Members, etc. The authority shall be composed of five members to be appointed by the governing authority of Jackson County. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, as shall be specified by the governing authority of the county, and such members shall take office on January 1, 1969. Thereafter, successors shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county for terms of five years so that the terms shall remain staggered. In the event a vacancy occurs on the authority, for any reason, the governing authority of the county shall appoint a member to serve the unexpired term. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the authority. The authority is hereby empowered to elect its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its membership. No member of the governing authority of Jackson County shall be eligible to serve as a member of said authority and only residents of Jackson County shall be eligible for membership on the authority. 
C.	Powers. The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the powers: 
1.	To sue and be sued, to receive and administer gifts, grants and donations; and administer trusts; 
2.	To borrow money, to issue notes and revenue bonds, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, lease, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
3.	To contract with Jackson County and with other political subdivisions of the state and with the state and with the United States government or with any department or agency of either and with private persons and corporations; 
4.	To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to any public or private corporation performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; 
5.	To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in the County of Jackson so as to relieve, insofar as possible, unemployment within its boundaries, and, to that end, to acquire, by purchase or gift, any building or structure within the limits of said county suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such buildings; 
6.	No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority, but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than 30 years from the date of transfer or possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking; 
7.	To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
8.	To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific manner; 
9.	To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated; 
10.	To appoint and select officers, agents and employees, including engineers, architects, builders and attorneys, and to fix their compensation; 
11.	To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
D.	Taxes. The property obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property obligations and interest on the obligations of Jackson County. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not include the exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
E.	Bonds. In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds, debentures and revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. Such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the laws of Georgia, as though such bonds had originally been authorized to be issued under the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended. The judgment of validation shall be final, conclusive and forever incontestable as to the validity of the bonds and the security for the payment thereof, as well as all other matters, both substantive and procedural, relative to their issuance, and any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for the lawful debt of the authority. 
F.	Debts. The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Jackson County, Georgia. 
G.	Property. Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to any property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Jackson County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
H.	Construction. This amendment [section], being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and welfare of Jackson County, Georgia, and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
I.	Severability. The provisions of this amendment [section] are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
J.	Projects. Any project of the authority shall be restricted to or within the limits of Jackson County, Georgia. 
K.	Construction. This amendment [section] is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding, for the public good and welfare, industry and trade within the County of Jackson and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment [section] and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
L.	General Assembly. The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1986 Ga. Laws, page 5473, which created a water and sewerage authority in the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; authority to provide for the development, storage treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This act [article] may be cited as the "Jackson County Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Jackson County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(a)	There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the "Jackson County Water and Sewerage Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title. Said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, bring and defend actions, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts, except that the authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees. The authority is granted the same exceptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the authority as provided under the provisions of this act [article]. 
(b)	The authority shall consist of five members. The board of commissioners of Jackson County shall appoint the members of the authority, each of whom shall reside in Jackson County. The board of commissioners of Jackson County shall appoint two of the initial members for initial terms of three years, two of the initial members for initial terms of two years, and one initial member for an initial term of one year, with subsequent appointments for terms of office of three years. After having served nine consecutive years, authority members shall not be reappointed without at least one year of inactive status. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the board of commissioners of Jackson County. Any authority member who is convicted of a felony shall be removed from the authority upon the date of conviction, regardless of appeal processes. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and another member as vice-chairman. It shall also elect a secretary and treasurer who does not necessarily have to be a member of the authority and who, if not a member, shall have no voting rights. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation; however, it is expressly understood that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority may make rules and regulations and adopt bylaws for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
(a)	As used in this act [article], the term: 
(1)	"Authority" means the Jackson County Water and Sewerage Authority created in section 2 of this act [article]. 
(2)	"Cost of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges; interest prior to and during construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses and of plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this act [article] and the construction of any project, the placing of same in operation and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes specified in this paragraph [subsection] shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] for such project. 
(3)	"Project" means and includes the acquisition, construction and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply; the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale within the territorial boundaries of the project area, and additions and improvements to, and extensions of, such facilities, and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate water system; the acquisition, construction and equipping of sewerage facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter; and the treatment of sewerage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds and lagoons within the territorial boundaries of the project area, and additions and improvements to, and extensions of, such facilities, and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate sewerage system. Said water facilities and said sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(4)	"Revenue bonds, bonds" and "obligations" mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said article and any amendments thereto, and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this act [article]. 
(b)	Any project shall be deemed self-liquidating if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenue and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, and all facilities used in connection therewith, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of, and interest on, the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The authority is authorized: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)	To acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of, real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)	To acquire in its own name, by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary for its corporate purposes and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority having no power to accept and pay for any property condemned under this act [article], except from the funds provided under the authority of this act [article]. In any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this act [article] upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists unless, at the time such property is acquired, a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)	To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their respective compensation; 
(5)	To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired or which are constructed or acquired by any other persons, firms or corporations; and any and all persons, firms and corporations, the state, and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. Without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties and political subdivisions for terms not exceeding 50 years; 
(6)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as defined in section 3 of this act [article], the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(6.1)	To operate, manage, administrate or provide related services for projects constructed or acquired by other persons, firms or corporations; 
(7)	To make loans with, and accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from, the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(8)	To make loans with, and accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from, the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(9)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to execute evidences of such indebtedness, to secure the same, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and to approve, execute and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state; and 
(11)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act [article]. 
(1999 Ga. Laws, page 3549) 
Sec. 5. - Financing projects[—Generally]. 
The authority, or any authority or body which may succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created by this act [article], is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as defined in section 3 of this act [article], of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided for in this act [article] for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. The interest rate or rates to be borne by any bonds and the time of payment of such interest shall be fixed, and, with respect to any interest rate which floats in response to a variable, the method of calculation shall be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Any bonds issued by the authority shall be exempt from all laws of the State of Georgia governing usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates to be borne by bonds or other obligations. 
Sec. 6. - Same—Form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine; and provision may be made for registration, conversion and exchangeability privileges, rights of redemption and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. 
Sec. 7. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and attested by the secretary and treasurer of the authority, the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto, and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman, and the secretary and treasurer of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such person as shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office at the actual time of the execution of such bonds, although, at the date of such bonds, such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature appears on any coupon ceases to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall have, and are declared to have, all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 9. - Same—Sale; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority; and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same—Interim; receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupon which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specified or required by this act [article]. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act [article] shall become effectively immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted; and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Jackson County or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund thereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project and the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys; may provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority; and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such resolutions as this act [article], and such resolution or trust indenture, may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to, and charged with, the payment of: (1) the interest of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3) any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment or otherwise; (4) the necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and (5) any investment fees or charges. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds, without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed and delivered. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article], or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this act [article] or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act [article] or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premiums, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act [article], insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 19. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act [article] or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the superior court of Jackson County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 20. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated. The state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state, and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the Jackson County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
Sec. 21. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state so compete with the authority. The provisions of this act [article] shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this act [article], shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this act [article], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as proceeds of short-term loans, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [article]. 
Sec. 23. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Jackson County; and the officers, agents and employees of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of Jackson County when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
Sec. 24. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and revise, from time to time, and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this act [article] to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of a water system, a sewerage system or a combined water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Sec. 25. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act [article], including the basis on which water and service facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
Sec. 26. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act [article] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This act [article] does not in any way take from Jackson County or any other municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate and maintain a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], known as the "Revenue Bond Law." 
Sec. 27. - Liberal construction of act [article]. 
This act [article], being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this act [article]. 
Sec. 28. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this act [article], the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, equipping, constructing, maintaining and operating adequate water supply, treatment and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment and distribution facilities; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in Jackson County and their environs, including municipalities inside and outside said county, and to adjoining counties; extending and improving such facilities; and doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation for such type of undertakings. 
Sec. 29. - Tax exempt status of authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city or county or the state or any political subdivisions thereof. 
Sec. 30. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act [article] are repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1964 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws, page 2260, which created the Jackson County Airport Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq.; authority to acquire, construct and maintain airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; general powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authority to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This act [article] may be cited as the "Jackson County Airport Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Jackson County Airport Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Jackson County Airport Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title, and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority of the trustee acting under the trust indenture herein provided for shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the authority. 
Sec. 3. - Membership. 
(a)	The authority shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. One member shall be appointed by each of the four district commissioners and the fifth member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. The members shall be appointed at large from anywhere within Jackson County. The members holding office on the effective date of this Act shall serve out the terms to which they were appointed. Beginning with the appointments in 2010, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, two members shall be appointed for terms of two years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified, and two members shall be appointed for terms of three years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Thereafter, all appointments of successors shall serve terms of three years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Immediately after such appointments, the members of the authority shall enter upon their duties. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, a resident of Jackson County for at least two years prior to the date of his or her appointment, and shall not have been convicted of a felony. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. 
(b)	The Jackson County Board of Commissioners may provide by resolution for compensation for the services of the members of the authority in such amounts as it may deem appropriate; provided, however, that such members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(c)	The members of the authority shall elect one of their number as chairperson and another as a vice chairperson. The members of the authority shall also elect a secretary, who need not be a member of the authority, and may also elect a treasurer, who need not be a member of the authority. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. If the secretary or treasurer are not members of the authority, such officer shall have no voting rights. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(d)	Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. 
(e)	The authority may be dissolved by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners if the authority has no outstanding debt. Upon such dissolution, all property owned by the authority shall be transferred to the county or to a municipality if such municipality has paid the debt service on the debt which financed a project. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act 337), sec. 1, p. 4660; 2009 Ga. Laws (Act 282), sec. 1, p. 4070) 
Sec. 4. - Meetings[; officers; quorum; compensation]. 
The authority shall hold their first regular meeting within 30 days after the approval of the act [from which this article is derived], and the first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in January. The authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it. At its first meeting in January of each year thereafter, the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairman and another member as secretary-treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31st of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the authority shall not be compensated for services rendered as members; however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 5. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy on the authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appropriate appointing authority and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 6. - Definitions. 
As used in this act [article], the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(a)	The word "authority" shall mean the Jackson County Airport Authority as created by the provisions of this act [article]. 
(b)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and related buildings, and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions, and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable for the operation of such airports and landing fields. 
(c)	The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and improving the same, and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the authority, including the proceeds from any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] for any such project or projects. 
(d)	The terms "revenue bonds, bonds" and "obligations," as used in this act [article], shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36 et seq.), amending the law formerly known as the "Revenue Certificate Law of 1937" (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761 et seq.), as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto, and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this act [article]. 
(e)	Any project shall be deemed self-liquidating, if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, and all properties used, leasing and sold in connection therewith, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(a)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)	To acquire, by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease or dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)	To acquire, in its own name, by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority; 
(d)	To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)	To make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable. The said authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 21 of this act [article]; 
(f)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)	To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(h)	To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source may impose; 
(i)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state, except the right of eminent domain; 
(k)	The authority and the trustee, acting under the trust indenture, are specifically authorized, subject from time to time, to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein, not required in the normal operation of, and usable in the furtherance of, the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 2 and section 21 hereof; 
(l)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this act [article]. 
Sec. 7A. - Limited tort liability. 
To the extent permitted by law, the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Jackson County; and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Jackson County when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act 337), sec. 2, p. 4660) 
Sec. 7B. - Exemption from certain taxes. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the state and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any municipality, county, or the state and any political subdivision thereof." 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act 337), sec. 2, p. 4660) 
Sec. 8. - Revenue bonds[—Generally]. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized, at one time or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as herein defined, of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the authority from time to time, shall be payable semi-annually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to, and in conformity with, the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 36 et seq.) amending the law formerly known as the "Revenue Certificate Law of 1937" (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761 et seq.), as amended, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto. 
Sec. 9. - [Same—]Form, denominations, registration, place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment or principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Sec. 10. - [Same—]Signatures, seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as, at the actual time of the execution of such bonds, shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Sec. 11. - [Same—]Negotiability, exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall have, and are hereby declared to have, all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument law of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 12. - [Same—]Sale, price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par, as provided in the Revenue Bond Law, unless said Revenue Bond Law be hereafter amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
Sec. 13. - Proceeds of Bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
Sec. 14. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds, upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 15. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 16. - Conditions precedent to issuance, object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this act [article]. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act [article] shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as in this act [article] provided. 
Sec. 17. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Jackson County, or any municipality therein, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not, directly, indirectly or contingently, obligate the said county, or any municipality therein, to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Sec. 18. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchases of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchases, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indentures may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 19. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this act [article] and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Sec. 20. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to, and charged with, the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds, without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 21. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article], or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act [article] or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 22. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act [article], insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 23. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of said Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government or any department or agency of the United States government, if subject to be used, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States government, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Jackson County Airport Authority. 
Sec. 24. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act [article] or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the superior court of Jackson County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article] shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 25. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 26. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this act [article], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [article]. 
Sec. 27. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this act [article], the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertaking and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for, and incident to, the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Sec. 28. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
Sec. 29. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act [article], including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
Sec. 30. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act [article] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 31. - Liberal construction of act [article]. 
This act [article], being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens on the United States, of the State of Georgia and of Jackson County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 32. - Effect of partial invalidity of act [article]. 
The provisions of this act [article] are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
ARTICLE V. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - SCHOOL DISTRICT TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1994 Ga. Laws, page 3758, which provides a homestead exemption from school district taxes for certain residents. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Definitions.] 
For purposes of this act [article], the term: 
(1)	"Ad valorem taxes" means all ad valorem taxes levied by, for or on behalf of the Jackson County School District, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)	"Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended. 
(3)	"Net income" means Georgia taxable net income for state income tax purposes, except net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his or her spouse under the federal Social Security Act. Income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this act [article]. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4358) 
Sec. 2. - [Applicability.] 
(a)	Each resident of the Jackson County School District, who is at least 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this subsection is made, is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Jackson County School District ad valorem taxes, for educational purposes, in the amount of $10,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
(b)	In addition to the exemption provided for in subsection (a) of this section, each resident of the Jackson County School District who is 65 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this subsection is made, is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Jackson County School District ad valorem taxes, for educational purposes, in the amount of $20,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead. 
(c)	The exemptions under this section shall only be granted if that person's net income, together with the income of the spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, does not exceed $18,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
(d)	The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4358) 
Sec. 3. - [Certificates and application forms.] 
The tax commissioner of Jackson County shall provide certificate and application forms for the exemption granted by this act [article] and shall require, with the initial application, an affidavit by the owner as to the age and income of the owner, the income of the owner's spouse and family members who reside at the homestead, and such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption, including, but not limited to, those federal and state tax returns filed for the immediately preceding taxable year for the owner, spouse and family members who resided at the homestead that year or, if such returns were not filed, satisfactory proof that there was insufficient income to require such filing. 
Sec. 4. - [Claims and returns.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. Any person who, as of the date the exemption provided by this act [article] first becomes applicable, has applied for and is eligible for the exemption provided persons 62 years of age or over pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-52, shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this act [article], without further application. 
Sec. 5. - [Continuing eligibility.] 
After any such owner has filed the proper affidavit as provided in this act [article], and has been allowed the exemption provided in this act [article], it shall not be necessary that such owner make application and file such affidavit for any year thereafter, and such exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any resident of the Jackson County School District who has claimed the homestead exemption provided for in this act [article] to notify the tax commissioner in the event that resident becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such homestead exemption. 
Sec. 6. - [Exemption in lieu of other home exemptions.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, any other homestead exemption from Jackson County School District ad valorem taxes. 
Sec. 7. - [Nonapplicability to other taxes.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall not apply to, or affect, any state, county or municipal taxes. 
Sec. 8. - [Effective date.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994. 
DIVISION 2. - INCOME AND AGE BASED TAXES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the 1994 Ga. Laws, page 4381, which provided a homestead exemption for certain residents as defined in the act. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Definitions.] 
For purposes of this act [article], the term: 
(1)	"Ad valorem taxes" means all ad valorem taxes levied by, for or on behalf of Jackson County. 
(2)	"Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, as amended. 
Sec. 2. - [Applicability.] 
Each resident of Jackson County who is 65 years of age or over is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Jackson County ad valorem taxes for $10,000.00 of the value of that homestead, if that person's earned income from all sources, expressly excluding social security and retirement benefits, together with the income of the spouse and family members of such person who reside within such homestead, does not exceed $18,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
Sec. 3. - [Certificates and application forms.] 
The tax commissioner of Jackson County shall provide certificate and application forms for the exemption granted by this act [article] and shall require, with the initial application, an affidavit by the owner as to the age and income of the owner, the income of the owner's spouse and family members who reside at the homestead, and such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption, including, but not limited to, those federal and state tax returns filed for the immediately preceding taxable year for the owner, spouse and family members who resided at the homestead that year or, if such returns were not filed, satisfactory proof that there was insufficient income to require such filing. 
Sec. 4. - [Claims and returns.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. Any person who, as of the date the exemption provided by this act [article] first becomes applicable, has applied for and is eligible for the exemption provided persons 65 years of age or over pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-52, shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this act [article] without further application. 
Sec. 5. - [Continuing eligibility.] 
After any such owner has filed the proper affidavit as provided in this act [article], and has been allowed the exemption provided in this act [article], it shall not be necessary that such owner make application and file such affidavit for any year thereafter, and such exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any resident of Jackson County who has claimed the homestead exemption provided for in this act [article] to notify the tax commissioner in the event that resident becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such homestead exemption. 
Sec. 6. - [Exemption in lieu of other home exemptions.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, any other homestead exemption from Jackson County ad valorem taxes. 
Sec. 7. - [Nonapplicability to other taxes.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall not apply to or affect any state taxes or municipal taxes. 
Sec. 8. - [Effective date.] 
The exemption granted by this act [article] shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws published in the Related Laws. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RESOLUTION 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws of the Resolutions published in the Related Laws. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Jackson County, Georgia," and may be so cited, as well as cited in shortened form, "Jackson County Code." 
(Code 2005, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners. The terms "board" and "board of commissioners" mean the board of commissioners of Jackson County, Georgia, as the governing authority of the county. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound by such signature. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Jackson County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean Jackson County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. Reference to a gender shall include the other gender. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean a calendar month and a calendar year, unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Jackson County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after, unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall include any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used, they refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the county, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code, or amendatory ordinances to this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly provided. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," when applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing, numerals, pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2005, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of such ordinances and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout this Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 2005, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of any remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since such judgment or decree would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2005, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)	Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)	Any ordinance concerning zoning or land development. 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)	Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code, that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Jackson County, Georgia, is amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a new section not previously existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Jackson County, Georgia, is amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2005, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the term "this ordinance," or similar terms, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions of this Code, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented by such alteration. Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code by an officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by a corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 2005, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Generally. Whenever in this Code, or in any other ordinance of the county, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the violation of such ordinance. Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Additional penalty for criminal or traffic law violations. 
(1)	In every case in the superior court, probate court, magistrate court or other court in the county shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state, or any ordinance of a political subdivision of the state there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(2)	At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or ordinance of a political subdivision of the state, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In each case in which any superior court, probate court, magistrate court or other county court shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-94. 
(3)	Sums required by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to the amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or as required by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the Judges of the Probate Court Retirement Fund of Georgia. 
(4)	The sums provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or the court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds, and shall be paid over to the governing authority of the county in which the court is located by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such moneys are collected. Such sums paid over to the governing authority shall be deposited by the governing authority into a special account known as the county jail fund. 
(5)	Any person whose duty it is to collect and remit the sums provided for in this subsection (b) who fails or refuses to remit such sums by the date required in subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(6)	Moneys collected pursuant to this subsection (b) and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the governing authority of the counties solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other counties, the state, municipalities or other political subdivisions as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ I. The county jail fund and moneys collected pursuant to this subsection (b) to be placed in the county jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities. This subsection (b) shall not preclude the appropriation or expenditure of other funds by the governing authority of any county or by the general assembly for the purpose of constructing, operating or staffing jails, correctional institutions and detention facilities. 
(c)	Additional penalty for drug law violations. 
(1)	In every case in which any court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30, 16-13-30.1 or 16-13-31, which offenses relate to certain activities regarding marijuana, controlled substances and noncontrolled substances, the courts shall be allowed to collect, as an additional penalty, a sum equal to 50 percent of the original fine. 
(2)	The sums required by O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100(a) shall be in addition to the amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund or as required by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia. 
(3)	The sums provided for in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100 shall be collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds, and shall be paid over to the governing authority of the county in which the court is located, upon receipt of the fine and assessment, if paid in full, at the time of sentencing or upon receipt of the final payment if the fine is paid in installments. The sums paid over to the governing authority shall be deposited into a special account to be known as the county drug abuse treatment and education fund. 
(4)	Moneys collected pursuant to this subsection (c) and placed in the county drug abuse treatment and education fund shall be expended by the governing authority of the county for which the fund is established solely and exclusively for drug abuse treatment and education programs relating to controlled substances and marijuana. This subsection shall not preclude the appropriation or expenditure of other funds by the governing authority of any county or by the general assembly for the purpose of drug abuse treatment or education programs. 
(Code 2005, § 1-12) 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; preemption of ordinances to general law, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 1-13. - Remedies. 
The county hereby expressly reserves the right to utilize any and all legal and equitable remedies in the enforcement of the provisions of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service. 
(a)	Imposition and levy. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of 75 cents. 
(b)	Collection of 9-1-1 charge of prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)	Administrative provisions. The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this section and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this section. 
(d)	Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 11-003, §§ 1—4, 7-18-2011) 
Secs. 2-2—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); county body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); matters over which county governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; election, term and compensation of county officers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-40. - Schedule; special meetings; location. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairperson or any three commissioners provided all members of the board of commissioners shall have been notified. Due notice of such meeting shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)	Meetings shall be held in the jury assembly room of the Jackson County Courthouse, 5000 Jackson Parkway, Jefferson, Georgia, 30549. 
(Code 2005, § 2-51) 
Secs. 2-41—2-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-70. - Parliamentary definitions. 
The following parliamentary definitions apply to the rules of procedure for the board of commissioners as set forth in this division: 
Adjourn means to officially terminate a meeting. 
Adjourned meeting means a meeting that is a continuation at a later time of a regular or special meeting. 
Adopt means to approve or pass by whatever vote is required for the motion. 
Affirmative vote means a vote in favor of the motion as stated. 
Agenda means the official list of items of business planned for consideration during the meeting. 
Approval of minutes means formal acceptance of the record of a meeting, thus making this record the official minutes of the commission. 
Chair means the presiding commissioner. 
Commission means the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. 
Commissioner means any person elected to that position. 
Common parliamentary law means the body of rules and principles that is applied by the courts in deciding litigation involving the procedure of any organization; the term does not include statutory law or particular rules adopted by any organization or board. 
Convene means to open a meeting. 
Debate means formal discussion of a motion under the rules of parliamentary law and more often herein referred to as "discussion." 
Defer or hold means to delay action by referring the motion to staff (or an agency, committee, etc.) for more information, or by postponing a vote to a certain time. 
Demand means an assertion of a parliamentary right by a commissioner. 
Dilatory motions or tactics means misuse of procedures or motions that are out of order or would delay or prevent progress in a meeting. 
Floor. When a person receives formal recognition from the chair, he "has the floor" and is the only person entitled to speak. 
Germane amendment means an amendment relating directly to the motion to which it is applied. 
Germane discussion means discussion relating directly to the matter involved. 
Hearing means a meeting for the purpose of listening to the views of an individual or of a particular group on a particular subject. 
In order means permissible and right from a parliamentary standpoint. 
Majority vote means an affirmation vote of at least three district commissioners, or the chairman and two district commissioners. 
Minutes means the legal record of the action of the commission after the record has been approved by vote of the body. 
Motion means a proposal submitted to the commission for its consideration and decision; it is introduced by the words, "I move that …." 
Objection means the formal expression of opposition to a proposed action. 
Order of business means the adopted order in which the business is presented to the meeting of the commission. 
Out of order means not correct, from a parliamentary standpoint, at the particular time. 
Parliamentary authority means the code of procedure adopted by the board as its parliamentary guide, governing in all parliamentary situations not otherwise provided for in the Charter; the rules of procedure for the board of commissioners as set forth in this division. 
Pending motion, sometimes referred to as pending question, means a motion that has been proposed and stated by the chair for the commission's consideration and that is awaiting decision by vote. 
Precedence means the rank or priority governing the motion. 
Precedent means a course of action that may serve as a guide or rule for future similar situations. 
Procedural motion means a motion to assist the commission in treating or disposing of a main motion, or a motion relating to the pending business otherwise at hand. 
Proposal or proposition means a statement of a motion of any kind for consideration and action. 
Quorum means the number of persons that must be present at a meeting of the commission to enable it to act legally on business; any three of the district commissioners, or the chairman and any two district commissioners, shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the county commission. 
Recognition means acknowledgement by the chair, giving a person sole right to speak. 
Reconsider means to review again a matter previously disposed of and to vote on it again; must be made on the same day of business. 
Request means a statement to the chair asking a question or some "right." 
Rescind means to nullify or cancel out a previous action; cannot be made if action has already been taken to implement the motion it wishes to rescind. 
Resolution means a formal motion, usually in writing, and introduced by the word "resolved," that is presented to the commission for a decision. 
Ruling means the chair's decision as it relates to the procedure of the board. 
Second means a commissioner's statement that he is willing to have the motion considered. 
Seriatim means consideration by sections or paragraphs. 
Statute means a law passed by the state legislature. 
Technical inquiry means request for information relevant to the business at hand. 
Tie vote means a vote in which the affirmative and negative votes are equal on a motion. 
Unanimous consent means deciding on a motion without voting on it but where no commissioner voices objection; with a single objection a vote must be taken. 
Unfinished business means any business that is postponed definitely to a time certain. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, app.) 
Sec. 2-71. - Operational procedure. 
(a)	Meetings. 
(1)	Regular and special called meetings of the county commission (also referred herein as the commission, the commissioners or the board) shall be as determined in article I, section 9, of the Related Laws printed in part I of this volume. The date, time and place of the meeting shall be determined by the board in the first meeting of the year. The board may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairperson or any three commissioners, provided all members of the board of commissioners shall have been notified of such special meeting, which shall be open to the public. All meetings may not begin before the prescribed time of which the public has been notified. 
(2)	An adjourned meeting is a continuation of the meeting immediately preceding, whether a regular or special meeting. 
a.	If the scheduled business of the commission is not completed due to time constraints or emergency, the meeting shall be adjourned to a specific date and time scheduled by the commission to allow for the completion of pending business. 
b.	In an adjourned meeting (regular or special), only business which would have been proper to consider at that meeting may be considered and acted upon at the adjourned meeting. 
c.	Adjourned meetings resume business under the same rules, limitations and rights as the original meeting from which it was adjourned. 
(3)	Executive session meetings shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-3 and 50-14-4, or as these sections may be amended from time to time. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the reasons for the session. 
(b)	Quorum. Any three of the district commissioners, or the chairman and any two district commissioners, shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the county commission. 
(1)	If a quorum is not present 30 minutes following the scheduled hour for convening, the chairman or the vice-chairman, or in their absence, the county manager (or his designee), may adjourn the meeting. 
(2)	If during the meeting there ceases to be a quorum, all business must stop except that the board, by majority vote to be recorded in the minutes (naming those present at the time of the vote) may: 
a.	Fix another day at which to reconvene; 
b.	Adjourn and return at the next regular meeting; 
c.	Recess to determine if a quorum will be present within a short period of time. 
(c)	Chairman. 
(1)	The chairman shall have the same rights and privileges of the other commissioners with respect to rights to make motions, debate and vote. Additionally, his duties during meetings shall include: 
a.	Presiding over meetings of the commission; 
b.	Calling the meeting to order at the scheduled hour; 
c.	Determining that a quorum is present; 
d.	Preserving decorum and order at all meetings; 
e.	Making the commissioners aware of the substance of each motion; 
f.	Calling for the vote; 
g.	Announcing the results of each vote; 
h.	Calling for a recess at such times as deemed advisable. 
(2)	The chairman shall appoint representatives from the board to serve as liaison to various departments as deemed appropriate. 
(3)	The chairman shall exercise other duties as prescribed in this Code. 
(d)	Vice-chairman. At the first regular meeting of each year, the board of commissioners shall elect from its members a vice-chairman. In the event of death, disqualification or resignation of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall perform the duties and exercise the authority of the chairman until a new chairman is chosen. The vice-chairman shall preside at meetings of the board of commissioners in the absence of the chairman and shall serve for the calendar year in which elected. In the event of a vacancy in the office of vice-chairman, the board of commissioners shall elect a new vice-chairman to serve for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(e)	Absence of chairman and vice-chairman. In the absence of the chairman and vice-chairman, the county manager shall determine whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the county manager shall call for the election of a temporary chair. The temporary chair shall preside over that meeting or until the conclusion of the business immediately pending at the time the chairman or vice-chairman arrives. 
(f)	Minutes. 
(1)	All actions of the commission, except for actions described in the O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-3 and 50-14-4, or as these sections may be amended from time to time, shall be accurately recorded by the clerk (or his designee) in the minutes, which shall include: 
a.	All main motions, exactly as worded when adopted (including amendments or stipulations); 
b.	The name of the maker of all important motions; 
c.	Disposition of all main motions, whether: 
1.	Adopted; 
2.	Defeated; 
3.	Referred to committee or to staff for further information or recommendations; 
4.	Held until ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (a definite time and date); 
d.	How each commissioner voted; 
e.	Commissioner's comments (these are only printed in the minutes if, when requested by the commissioner, the majority votes to have the remarks included). 
(2)	The responsibility for correcting and approving the minutes shall be vested only in the members of the commission. The minutes of each meeting shall indicate their subsequent approval/correction. The minutes may be corrected whenever an error is noticed regardless of the time which has elapsed. 
(3)	The county manager/county clerk or deputy clerk shall attest to the minutes. 
(g)	Agenda. 
(1)	Requests for items to be on the agenda for consideration must be submitted in writing to the commissioner's office during office hours at least one week before the day of the meeting. 
(2)	Any resolution or ordinance which is to become law shall be written in ordinance form. 
(3)	An ordinance, other than a zoning amendment which has been advertised according to the Unified Development Code, may be adopted on the date of introduction. 
(4)	Copies of proposed ordinances shall be made available to each board member, the county attorney, and the office of the board clerk for public inspection. The same may be advertised as directed by the board. 
(5)	The agenda shall be prepared by the county manager/county clerk or deputy clerk and shall be available for inspection by noon on Thursday prior to the meeting date. Items may not be added after that time except upon the concurrence of the board by vote at such meeting. Other than constitutional officers, no county employee shall appear before the board without having reviewed the matter to be discussed with the county manager. Matters having to do with the county departments shall be presented by the county manager with the assistance of the affected department or employee. 
(6)	While it is usual for unfinished business (that referred or held from another meeting) to be considered prior to new business, the order of business listed in the published agenda may be changed when it seems advisable and approved by a majority of the commission. 
(h)	Consent agenda. 
(1)	At the work session held the first Monday of the month, the board of commissioners may, by unanimous consent, designate certain items to be placed on a consent agenda for the regular meeting held on the third Monday of each month. 
(2)	All such items placed upon the consent agenda may be acted upon at one time by motion, seconded, and unanimous vote of the board of commissioners. 
(3)	All commissioners must agree unanimously for any item to be placed upon the consent agenda and all action placed thereon must be approved unanimously. 
(4)	Any commissioner may remove any item from consent for further discussion and in order to vote on the item individually. 
(i)	Non-agenda items. 
(1)	A non-agenda item shall be defined as that which is deemed by a commissioner or the county manager to require urgent attention but has not been placed on the published agenda. 
(2)	A majority vote of the commission shall be required to add a non-agenda item. 
(j)	Voting. 
(1)	The chairman shall state the motion or question at the time of calling for a vote. When a question has been called by the chairman, no discussion from the audience will be permitted. 
(2)	All votes shall be taken by the raising of hands. An affirmative vote of at least three district commissioners, or the chairman and two district commissioners, shall be required to adopt a motion, except where otherwise indicated. 
(3)	The chairman can terminate discussion of any item or statement at any time it is deemed irrelevant or repetitious. 
(4)	A tie vote shall cause all procedural motions to be defeated. A tie vote on a main motion shall keep the motion as pending before the board and the motion shall be rescheduled for another time. 
(5)	No commissioner who is present at any meeting of the commission at which an official decision, ruling or other official act is to be taken or adopted may abstain from voting in regard to any decision, ruling or act. A vote shall be recorded or counted for each such commissioner present, except when, with respect to any such commissioner, there is or appears to be a possible conflict of interest. 
(6)	Votes on zoning matters shall normally be made at the same meeting as the board holds its public hearing; however, it shall be the prerogative of the board to vote at the same meeting as the hearing if all commissioners agree to do so. 
(k)	Public participation in board meetings. The board of commissioners welcomes visitors to board meetings and is willing to hear any person desiring to appear before the board. 
(1)	Persons wishing to address the board shall do so during the citizen comment portion near the beginning of the agenda. 
a.	Citizens are allowed to address the board of commissioners at each regular meeting of the commission. Each speaker will be allotted a maximum of four minutes for their presentation. However, the chairman can terminate discussion of any item or statement or may allow individuals to speak longer if new points are made. There is no limit to the number of speakers that may address the board so long as there is new information. 
b.	A person shall not speak more than twice unless that person is directly involved in the matter before the board. 
c.	After each individual speaker's remarks have concluded, the chairman may, but shall not be required to, briefly respond, either personally or through another member of the board of commissioners whom the chairman shall delegate. If necessary, action on the matter for consideration of the commission will be placed on the agenda for the second regular meeting following the date of the comment. 
(2)	All persons shall address the commission in the following manner: 
a.	State his name and address. 
b.	If requested by the commission, the speaker may be required to state: 
1.	Whether he is speaking for himself or for another; 
2.	If he represents an organization or represents a policy established by an organization or governing body and whether he is being compensated by the person for whom he speaks; 
3.	Whether he or any member of his immediate family has a personal interest in the pending matter. 
(3)	All remarks shall be made to the commission as a body and addressed through the chair. Remarks shall not be made to a particular commissioner. 
(4)	Questions from commissioners and/or the county manager may be asked for clarification. However, no person shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the commission, without permission of the chair. 
(5)	No person shall be allowed to make impertinent, derogatory, offensive or slanderous remarks while addressing the commission. 
a.	A person may be barred from further speaking before the commission in that meeting if his conduct is deemed out of order; 
b.	A person, once barred for improper conduct, shall not be permitted to continue or again address the commission in that meeting unless a majority vote of the commission allows; 
c.	In the event the speaker thus barred fails to obey the ruling, the chair may take such action as is deemed appropriate, including the removal of such person from the assembly; 
d.	The commission may bar a person from addressing commission meetings for up to 60 days for improper conduct; 
e.	A person barred by the commission for this period may request a hearing by written request to the chair stating the reasons for a reversal of the decision; 
f.	The hearing shall be placed on the agenda and heard by the commission. A majority vote of the entire board shall be required to overturn the previous decision to bar the person. 
(l)	Public hearings. 
(1)	A public hearing is understood to be a forum for people interested in the subject matter to present information to the commission for their consideration as they deliberate an issue. It is not a forum for opponents and proponents to debate their differences and neither is it a forum for debate or argument between members of the commission and opponents or proponents, or each other. 
(2)	All public hearings shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county at least two weeks prior to such hearing. 
(3)	Appropriate staff shall first give the commission an overview of the application or the item of business. 
(4)	Proponents and opponents will each be limited to a total of ten minutes for formal presentation on any agenda item. The proponents or opponents may opt to devote their entire time allocation to one or more speakers with the total time of all speakers not exceeding ten minutes. 
(5)	In addition to a verbal presentation, written material may be submitted to the commission for its consideration. 
(m)	Appointments of the board. 
(1)	Appointments shall be made as necessary: 
a.	When it has been determined, by rotation or some other manner, that it is the turn of a particular commissioner to nominate a candidate for a position, such candidate must be elected by a majority of the board. 
b.	Commissioners will complete and submit in advance (not less than five days) a completed board of commissioners appointment form that provides information on the appointee. 
c.	If the nominee fails to receive a majority vote, the commissioner who made the nomination may nominate another candidate until the position is filled by majority vote. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § I) 
Sec. 2-72. - Decorum of debate. 
The following practices shall be followed in the discussions (debate) on motions and matters presented to the board of commissioners: 
(1)	Adherence to agenda. 
a.	In discussion, the remarks made by the commissioners shall be confined to the motion or matters immediately before the body. 
b.	Concerning the opportunity for commissioners to address the public at regular meetings: 
1.	Each commissioner shall have an opportunity to address the public on any topic. 
2.	During these remarks, a commissioner must observe the same rules of decorum as those in subsection (2) of this section and may be called to order by the chairman if there is a breach of those applicable rules. 
3.	A commissioner may not use this time to interrogate another commissioner, staff or citizens. No one shall attempt to enter into discussion with a commissioner who has chosen to avail himself of this opportunity to share his opinions with the public. 
(2)	Discussion of the item of business. In discussion, a commissioner may condemn the nature or likely consequences of the proposed measure in strong terms, but must avoid personalities, and under no circumstances may he attack or question the motives of another commissioner or staff. The item, and not a person, shall be the item under discussion. 
(3)	Call to order; remarks. The chair shall immediately call as out of order any remarks made in regards to comments outside the issue being addressed; or another commissioner may call this breach of procedure to the attention of the chair and other commissioners. In either case, the errant commissioner shall immediately cease the breach of decorum and continue with his remarks confined to the topic. 
(4)	Discussion through the chair. All discussion shall be made through the chair, and one commissioner may not interrogate another commissioner or person speaking from the public except through the chair (or with the permission of the chair). 
(5)	Equal opportunity. After a commissioner has spoken or asked questions on a matter before the commission, other commissioners shall be given the opportunity to speak. If no other commissioner wishes to speak to the issue, the commissioner may continue speaking to the issue. 
(6)	Common disruptions. During discussion or voting, a commissioner shall not disturb the other commissioners in any way that may be considered disruptive to the proceedings or hamper the transaction of business. 
(7)	Call to order; action. The chair may rule as out of order any action deemed inappropriate or dilatory and may interrupt a speaker for reasons deemed necessary by the chair. The chairman shall say, "Commissioner, those remarks are out of order. Please cease this line of comments and restrict your comments to the inquiry and the merits of the agenda item." 
(8)	Out of order. If a member of the commission refuses to comply with these rules as adopted by the commission, the following procedure shall be used: 
a.	The commissioner shall be called to order by the chair, who shall say, "Commissioner ____________ (using name), you are now personally out of order. If you persist, an official reprimand (or censure) will be entered into the record." 
b.	If a commissioner chooses to defy the ruling of the chair, the chairman shall state, "Commissioner, you are personally out of order. Madam/Mr. Clerk, let the record indicate a reprimand against Commissioner ____________ . Commissioner ____________ , you have a right at this time to appeal the ruling of the chair by asking that a roll call vote of the commissioners present be taken and a statement by each commissioner be recorded as to why he is for or against the ruling of the chair. A majority vote of the board present shall govern. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § II) 
Sec. 2-73. - Procedure in meetings. 
(a)	Motions. Prior to taking the vote, the chair should state the motion (or resolution) or its substance. 
(b)	Ranking motions. 
(1)	These motions shall take precedence in order in which they are listed below: 
a.	Adjourn; 
b.	Recess; 
c.	Motions of privilege; 
d.	Call the question; 
e.	Limit discussion or debate by the commission; 
f.	Hold until a time certain; 
g.	Refer back to staff/committee; or refer to staff/committee; 
h.	Amend; 
i.	Main motion. 
(2)	A main motion shall be a motion whose introduction brings business before the commission. 
a.	Assumed main motions. A recommendation from staff, or another item published in the agenda for action, shall be handled as an assumed main motion by the chair. That is, the chair shall, upon the conclusion of a report, state, "The question (or motion) before you is …" (stating the motion in the affirmative). No second will be required in these instances and the chair, in assuming such motion, is not presumed to be in favor of the motion and may speak against it if he so wishes. 
1.	Possible dispositions of such a motion assumed by the chair include: 
(i)	Adopt; 
(ii)	Amend and adopt with amendments (or stipulations); 
(iii)	Defeat; 
(iv)	Refer back to staff/committee; or refer to staff/committee; 
(v)	Hold until ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (a definite time). 
2.	Incidental motions such as consider en gross, consider by paragraph, or divide the motion (each described in subsection (d) of this section) may also be applied to such assumed motions. 
b.	Other main motions (motions that are incidental or relating to business of the commission, or its past or future action, or arising as non-agenda items (see section 2-71(i))) shall require a second, and, if such motions fail to obtain a second, the chairman shall state, "Since there is no second, the motion is not before this meeting." 
(3)	Concerning the amending of particular motions: 
a.	If a commissioner feels that the main motion might be more acceptable in a way other than the way presented, the commissioner may amend through substitution, insertion of stipulations, striking out portions, or striking out and inserting portions. Such proposed amendments shall be handled in one of the following ways: 
1.	By unanimous consent of the commissioners; the chair, or another commissioner, through the chair, may suggest changes or stipulations, and if there are no objections from the commissioners, the motion shall be amended by unanimous consent. 
2.	With a second, discussion and a majority vote on the proposed amendment. 
b.	If a proposed amendment fails to obtain unanimous consent or a majority vote, the main motion considered shall be the one originally presented. 
c.	An amendment must be germane (relating to the substance of the main motion) and may not introduce an independent question. 
d.	Improper amendments shall be: 
1.	One which is not germane; 
2.	One which would make the adoption of the amended motion equivalent to a rejection of the motion; 
3.	One which is frivolous or absurd. 
(4)	If the commissioners feel that adequate information has not been given, the board may, by majority vote, refer the motion to staff (or an agency, committee, etc.) for more information. A date may be set for hearing the additional information or it may be open-ended. This motion shall require a second and shall be debatable only as to whether or not it shall be referred to whom it shall be referred, or when the person to whom it is referred shall report back. If the motion fails, the motion to be considered shall be that motion which was on the floor prior to the motion to refer. 
(5)	A motion to hold to a time certain (postpone) may be used if a majority of the commission feels that the motion before them should be considered at a more convenient time or if the discussion shows that a final decision should be made at a later time or date. This motion shall be used if the commissioners themselves feel that they may obtain information that is needed or that the facts as presented are not adequate for their final vote. A second shall be required and discussion shall be limited to the reason for holding the motion or the time to which it is to be held. If the motion fails, the motion to be considered shall be that motion which was on the floor prior to the motion to hold. 
(6)	If a commissioner feels that a set period of time for discussion of a motion should be limited as to time for the motion as a whole, or as to individual time given, the commissioner may move to "limit discussion (or debate) to ____________ minutes." This motion shall require a second and no discussion on the motion shall be allowed. It shall require a four-fifths vote to adopt. Should only four members of the commission be present, a unanimous vote shall be required. 
(7)	A commissioner may call the question (a motion to end discussion) when it is clear that further discussion is unnecessary or that discussion is becoming repetitive. This motion shall require a second and no discussion on the motion shall be allowed. It shall require a four-fifths vote to adopt. Should only four members of the commission be present, a unanimous vote shall be required. 
(8)	If any matters occur such as to impede a commissioner in attending to the business, e.g., too much noise, the microphone not working, matters that affect the safety, orderliness, or comfort of the commissioners, or affect the honor of an individual commissioner, such commissioner may state to the chairman that he has a question of privilege and the matter must be addressed before the pending business of the commission continues. No vote is required unless a motion arises out of the privilege. 
(9)	A recess may be taken as it appears on the agenda or declared by the chair when he deems it advisable or by a motion from a commissioner. If the motion is made by a commissioner, a second and an affirmative majority vote shall be required to recess. 
(10)	The highest-ranking motion shall be the motion to adjourn, requiring a second and a majority vote with no discussion allowed, except that the motion shall contain a time to hear any noncompleted items on the agenda, if such exist. If all business on the agenda has been completed, the chair may assume the motion and, without a second, obtain unanimous consent to adjourn. 
(c)	Motions used to bring back an issue. Except as otherwise provided by law, if a commissioner wishes to bring back to the board a matter which has been adopted, he may do so through the motions to reconsider, rescind and amend something previously adopted. These shall have the same rank as a main motion. 
(1)	If a commissioner wishes to amend an action taken at a previous meeting, the motion to amend something previously adopted shall be followed. This motion shall be used when a matter which was previously adopted by the commission needs to be amended. A second shall be required and full discussion shall be allowed. If the item has been listed on the published agenda, a majority vote shall be required for adoption. A majority vote shall be required if the item is not on the official agenda, except that, should only four members of the commission be present, a unanimous vote shall be required. 
(2)	If in the same meeting, new information or changed situations make it appear that a different result might reflect the will of the board, any commissioner (regardless of how he originally voted on the matter) may move to reconsider the vote. A motion to reconsider may be applied to a vote that was either affirmative or negative and shall propose no specific change in a decision but simply shall propose that the motion be reopened for discussion and another vote taken. A second shall be required to this motion and discussion shall be allowed as to the reasons for wishing to reconsider the vote. A majority vote shall be required to adopt the motion to reconsider. 
(3)	If a commissioner wishes to annul an action taken at a previous meeting, the motion to rescind may be used. The motion to rescind shall require prior notice at a regularly scheduled meeting of the intent to rescind a motion at the next scheduled meeting. The motion to rescind shall not be in order if: 
a.	The motion to reconsider is made, i.e., at the same meeting; 
b.	The motion to reconsider was taken and lost; 
c.	The matter is routine and only part of the action needs to be changed, in which case the motion to amend something previously adopted shall be used; 
d.	Something has been done as a result of the vote to implement the earlier action adopted. 
The motion to rescind shall be placed on the agenda for the following meeting, a second shall be required, and discussion may go into the merits of the motion involved in rescinding. A majority shall be required to pass the motion after such prior notice. 
(d)	Incidental motions. Incidental motions have no rank but shall be decided immediately before business may proceed and may be used throughout the meeting as follows: 
(1)	A point of information is a request, directed to or through the chair, for information relevant to the business at hand, but not related to parliamentary procedure. 
(2)	A commissioner may call for a point of order if he believes that the chair has failed to notice a breach in the rules. This point of order shall require the chair to make a ruling on the question involved. 
(3)	Whenever a commissioner believes that the chair is mistaken in his ruling, a commissioner may appeal the chair's decision. An appeal shall require a second and shall be debatable with the chair speaking first to explain his ruling. The chair may also close out the debate with a statement defending the ruling. An appeal may be made only on a ruling and may not be made: 
a.	In response to a parliamentary inquiry or point of information; 
b.	In areas that challenge verifiable rulings of factual nature. 
The chair shall state the motion as "Shall the chair's decision be sustained?" A tie vote shall sustain the chair because a majority of those voting shall be required to overturn the chair's ruling. 
(4)	A parliamentary inquiry is a question directed to the chair to obtain information on a matter of parliamentary law or the rules of the commission. The chair will answer such questions or may ask the county attorney or parliamentarian for an opinion. The chair's reply, whether or not he has requested advice from the county attorney or parliamentarian, is an opinion, not a ruling. If a commissioner does not agree with the chair's opinion, he may act in a way contrary to this opinion and if ruled out of order may then appeal the chair's ruling. The chair is not obligated to respond to hypothetical questions. 
(5)	If the motion presented contains two or more parts capable of standing as separate motions, a commissioner may move to divide the motion. This motion shall require a second and discussion shall be allowed only on why it should or should not be divided. A majority vote shall be required to adopt the motion to divide the motion. 
(6)	If a main motion is in the form of a resolution or document containing several paragraphs or sections which are not separate motions but could be discussed more efficiently if discussed in sections, a motion to discuss by paragraphs, sections, or numbered agenda items under a tab may be made. A second shall be required and discussion shall be brief as to the necessity for the action. A majority vote shall be required to consider by paragraphs, sections, or numbered agenda items under a tab. 
(7)	Once a motion has been moved and seconded, it belongs to the entire commission and not to the maker of the motion; therefore, if a commissioner wishes to withdraw a motion that is officially before the board, action of the board must be taken in either of the following ways: 
a.	The chair may ask the board if there are any objections to the motion being withdrawn. If there are no objections, the motion shall be withdrawn by unanimous consent, without the need for the seconder to withdraw his second; 
b.	If there is an objection to the motion being withdrawn, then the chair shall take an official vote, a second being required. A majority vote shall be required to adopt the motion to withdraw the motion. 
(8)	When several alternatives need to be considered (such as staff recommendations that propose various options for the board to consider), unlimited choices may be considered by filling the blank in the motion: 
a.	No commissioner may suggest more than one proposal for filling the blank without unanimous consent from the other commissioners; 
b.	Each proposal shall be debatable and shall be treated as an independent item to be voted on separately until one has been approved by a majority. As soon as one proposal has received a majority, no others shall be considered; 
c.	Alternatives (from staff recommendations and/or suggestions by commissioners) are listed in logical order for voting: 
1.	Names are listed in the order in which they were proposed; 
2.	Other proposals are listed in the order of their probable acceptability, beginning with the least popular choice. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § III) 
Sec. 2-74. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney or his designee shall serve as parliamentarian and shall advise and assist the chair and the commission in matters of parliamentary law. A professional parliamentarian may be consulted as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § IV) 
Sec. 2-75. - Parliamentary authority. 
The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern meetings of the board of commissioners in all areas in which it is applicable and in which it is not inconsistent with these rules adopted by the commissioners or higher law. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § V) 
Sec. 2-76. - Suspending the rules of order/amendments. 
(a)	The board reserves the right to waive any or all of these procedures and rules of order upon its own motion; however, any such motion shall require the unanimous consent of the board. 
(b)	These rules may be amended by a majority vote of the entire commission at a regular meeting or special meeting of the board of commissioners, provided notice has been given of the amendment at the meeting prior to the vote on the amendment. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2009, § VI) 
Secs. 2-77—2-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. Such manual includes the county's drug-free workplace policy. Official copies of the personnel manual are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

Sec. 2-92. - Legal defense of officers and employees. 
(a)	On occasion, while in the performance of their official duties, the elected officials of the county and its employees are named as defendants in lawsuits. In order to support and protect its elected officials and employees from the cost of defending lawsuits, the board of commissioners has determined that a policy should be established to protect and defend the elected officials and employees. 
(b)	The board of commissioners resolves that all lawsuits filed against any elected official or employee of the county that arise out of the performance of county duties shall be defended by the county at the county's cost and at no expense to the elected official or employee. 
(Code 2005, § 2-101; Res. of 9-9-1997) 
Secs. 2-93—2-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

Sec. 2-113. - Piedmont Regional Library. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint one person to the Piedmont Regional Library Board for a term of three years. 
(Code 2005, § 2-131) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for libraries, archives and arts and sciences programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(10). 
Secs. 2-114—2-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The county has adopted and publishes separately its purchasing policies and procedures. Official copies of such policies and procedures are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a); appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance or budget resolution, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-140. - Fiscal year. 
The county's fiscal year shall commence on January 1 and conclude the following December 31. 
(Code 2005, 2-171) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a). 
Secs. 2-141—2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-171. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)	Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by county officials; 
(2)	Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the county; 
(3)	Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the county; and 
(4)	Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-172. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed county officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the county shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-173. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
County official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include county employees but does mean the chairman, members of the county commission, county manager, county clerk, county attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the County Charter, as amended. The term "county official" also includes all individuals, including county employees, appointed by the chairman and/or county commission as appropriate to county authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the chairman and/or county commission. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the county commission or other county board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the county. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any county official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a county official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general county fees, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)	The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)	The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.	Five thousand dollars in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or 
b.	Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the county council; or 
(4)	The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-174. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	No county official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the county. 
(b)	No county official, in any matter before the commission or other county body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)	No county official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the county council or other county body. 
(d)	No county official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)	No county official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the county except as authorized by state law. 
(1)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the county attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the county. 
(2)	This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the county and a county official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a county manager or county administrator). 
(3)	Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the county shall make that interest known in writing to the county council and the county clerk. 
(f)	All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)	No county official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a county official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of county duties. 
(i)	If a county official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the county council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)	No county official shall use county facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)	No county official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)	A county official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)	A county official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)	A county official shall not order any goods and services for the county without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No county official shall attempt to obligate the county nor give the impression of obligating the county without proper prior authorization. 
(o)	No county official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the county for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the county therefore. 
(p)	No county official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before any of the courts in Jackson County or the Piedmont Judicial Circuit. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-175. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)	A county official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)	A county official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the board of commissioners prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the county. 
(c)	Where the interest of a county official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the county official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-176. - Board of ethics. 
(a)	The board of ethics of the county shall consist of three residents of the county, one appointed by the chairman, two appointed by the county commission. 
(b)	All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the county for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)	All members of the board of ethics shall serve a three-year term. 
(d)	No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the county or has been employed by the county. 
(e)	Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the county, or any pending or potential litigation against the county or any county official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)	The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The county council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the county, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)	No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the County of Jackson. 
(i)	Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)	Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the county governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-177. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)	All complaints against county officials shall be filed with the board of ethics, who may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the county council or the board of ethics. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the chair of the board of ethics shall forward a copy of the complaint to the county official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)	All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)	Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary justification of the board of commissioners. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary of the county commission; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)	Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary justification of the board of commissioners; provided, however, that a rejection of such compliant by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such part might have otherwise have at law or in equity against the city officials. 
(e)	The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)	The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within it jurisdiction where the board of commission has not prescribed such form. 
(h)	To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a county official, whether currently serving as a county official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(h)	To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a county official, whether currently serving as a county official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-178. - Service of complaint. 
The county clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the county official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to board of commissioners within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the county official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The county official subject to the inquiry shall have also had the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the county council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-179. - Right to appeal. 
(a)	Any county official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)	An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Jackson County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-180. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)	Public reprimand or censure by the county council; or 
(2)	Request for resignation by the county council. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, § 1, 10-18-2010) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTILLED SPIRITS, WINE AND MALT BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-04, §§ 1—23, adopted Dec. 21, 2009, amended Art. II and restated the article to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 4-19—4-36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Feb. 20, 2006, §§ 1—12, 14—18, 21; and an ordinance adopted Sept 11, 2006, §§ 1—12, 14—18. 

Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
License means the authorization by the board to engage in the package sale or sale for consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any holder of a class D license issued under this chapter who derives at least 50 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of meals or food prepared on the premises of the caterer by the caterer and who otherwise qualifies with the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. Title 3, Chapter 11. 
Licensee, under this article, means any entity which seeks to obtain the class of license, as defined in section 4-21, for the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)	Class A-1 or A-2. 
a.	Have a minimum of three full time employees; 
b.	Have a minimum of 15 paved off-street parking facilities; 
c.	Have a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its customers which it owns, hires or leases; 
d.	Have a minimum of 70 percent of the gross income of the licensee deriving from the sale of other retail merchandise or other similar sources relating directly to providing goods or services to those being served by the licensee's premises. The county reserves the right to analyze such income to determine if income is being allocated in a manner calculated to avoid the terms of this provision. Any prices for retail merchandise which is not a normal and reasonable charge shall be presumed to be an attempt to avoid the terms of this provision; and 
e.	Have a minimum distance, measured by a registered land surveyor in a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale to either: 
1.	The front door of the building of a church or government-owned treatment center; or 
2.	To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes of 600 feet. 
(2)	Class B-1 or B-2. 
a.	Have a minimum of three full-time employees; 
b.	Have a minimum of 50 paved off-street parking facilities; 
c.	Have a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its guests which it owns, hires or leases; 
d.	Have suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment to serve meals or snacks for its guests; 
e.	Have a minimum of 50 percent of the gross income of the licensee deriving from the sale of food stuffs, the use of its recreational facilities or other similar sources relating directly to providing goods or services to those being served by the licensee's premises. The county reserves the right to analyze such income to determine if income is being allocated in a manner calculated to avoid the terms of this provision. The term "food stuffs" shall not include mixers or any other component of a wine or malt beverage. Any price for foodstuff or services which is not a normal and reasonable charge shall be presumed to be an attempt to avoid the terms of this provision; and 
f.	Have a minimum distance, measured by a registered land surveyor in a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale to either: 
1.	The front door of the building of a church or government-owned treatment center; or 
2.	To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes of 600 feet. 
(3)	Class C-1. 
a.	Have a minimum of three full-time employees; 
b.	Have a minimum of 50 paved off-street parking facilities; 
c.	Have a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its guests which it owns, hires or leases; 
d.	Have suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment to serve meals or snacks for its guests; 
e.	Have a minimum of 50 percent of the gross income of the licensee deriving from the sale of food stuffs, the use of its recreational facilities or other similar sources relating directly to providing goods or services to those being served by the licensee's premises. The county reserves the right to analyze such income to determine if income is being allocated in a manner calculated to avoid the terms of this provision. The term "food stuff' shall not include mixers or any other component of a distilled spirit, wine, or malt beverage. Any price for foodstuff or services which is not a normal and reasonable charge shall be presumed to be an attempt to avoid the terms of this provision; and 
f.	Have a minimum distance, measured by a registered land surveyor in a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale to either: 
1.	The front door of the building of a church or government-owned treatment center; or 
2.	To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes of 600 feet. 
Premises means the premises described in a license issued pursuant to this article. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Wholesale or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruit, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
Any term not defined herein shall have that definition established by the provisions of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (Title 3, O.C.G.A.) 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 12-21-2009 ; Ord. No. 14-004, § 1, 9-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-20. - Regulation of sales of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-21. - Licensing requirements. 
No distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages shall be sold except under a license granted by the board, after notice and a public hearing as provided herein, or by public development to a licensee. Application to sell distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages as set out herein below shall be made on forms provided by the board as follows: 
(1)	All licensees. 
a.	For the remainder of the year 2009, applications will be considered anytime. For the remainder of the year 2012, Class F, Class G, Class H, Class I and Class J applications by existing license holders will be considered anytime. Any person holding an existing Class A, B, C, D or E license for 2012 who has not had a violation of the terms of said license(s) and this ordinance, and who has not had a change of ownership or corporate officer(s) who were the applicants on the current license, or supervisory personnel holding alcohol service training certificates as required by subsection 4-25(5) may make application for a Class F, G, H, I or J license without complying with subsection 4-21(1)c., (1)d., or (1)e., or section 4-25. 
b.	A license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before November 1st of the preceding year. 
c.	Each applicant shall finish a complete set of fingerprints for each corporate officer and employee, if such employee is responsible for the management and operations of the applicant, which shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for a period of two years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal records, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the board considering such application. 
d.	1.	Regarding all new applications, including applications for previously licensed locations regarding which no license is currently in effect, a notice of each application shall be advertised in the official gazette of the county once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the board at which the application is to be acted upon. At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall post a sign or signs provided by public development stating the date, time and place for the scheduled board of commissioners' public hearing, and the nature of the proposed license. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the license has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
2.	Regarding all applications for locations holding a license currently in effect, public development shall review such applications and, upon determining that any such application conforms to the requirements of this chapter, issue the new license. 
e.	Any applicant for a license must show, to the satisfaction of the board or public development, as applicable, financial responsibility. Financial statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the board. 
(2)	Class A-1. A Class A-1 license shall be required for the sale of wine by the package, not for consumption on the premises. 
(3)	Class A-2. A Class A-2 license shall be required for the sale of malt beverages by the package, not for consumption on the premises. 
(4)	Class B-1. A Class B-1 license shall be required for the sale of wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(5)	Class B-2. A Class B-2 license shall be required for the sale of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(6)	Class C-1. A Class C-1 license shall be required for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(7)	Class D-1. A Class D-1 license shall be required for the sale of wine by the drink, by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(8)	Class D-2. A Class D-2 license shall be required for the sale of malt beverages by the drink, by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(9)	Class D-3. A Class D-3 license shall be required for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(10)	Class E-1. A Class E-1 license shall be required for the sale of wine at wholesale to other wholesale or retail dealers. 
(11)	Class E-2. A Class E-2 license shall be required for the sale of malt beverages at wholesale to other wholesale dealers or retail dealers. 
(12)	Class F-1. A Class F-1 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of wine by the package, not for consumption on the premises. 
(13)	Class F-2. A Class F-2 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of malt beverages by the package, not for consumption on the premises. 
(14)	Class G-1. A Class G-1 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(15)	Class G-2. A Class G-2 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(16)	Class H-1. A Class H-1 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(17)	Class I-1. A Class I-1 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of wine by the drink by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(18)	Class I-2. A Class I-2 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of malt beverages by the drink, by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(19)	Class I-3. A Class I-3 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of distilled spirits by the drink, by a licensed caterer for consumption on the premises only. 
(20)	Class J-1. A Class J-1 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of wine at wholesale to other wholesale or retail dealers. 
(21)	Class J-2. A Class J-2 license shall be required for the sale on Sunday of malt beverages at wholesale to other wholesale dealers or retail dealers. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 3, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-004, §§ 2, 3, 8-20-2012 ; Ord. No. 14-004, § 2, 9-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-22. - Standards for license. 
The following standards shall be applied to all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder. 
(1)	All applicants for a license must be of good business reputation, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees, or corporate officers shall be of good character. 
(2)	No license shall be granted to an applicant, a corporate officer of which has been convicted under any federal, state, or county law for a criminal offense involving distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with federal, state or county laws. 
(3)	A license application may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have ownership, control and direction of the operation of the licensee, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(4)	The board, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the location of the licensee. If in their judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstance may be grounds for denying the application. 
(5)	All applicants for a Class B-I, Class B-2, or Class C-1 license must provide evidence that at least one person in the employ of the applicant, who is in a supervisory capacity and is on duty, has completed an alcohol service training course. Such course may be reviewed and approved by the board. 
(6)	No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the premises is in compliance with all Jackson County ordinances, including, without limitation, any ordinances dealing with building safety or zoning. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 4, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-23. - No assignment of license. 
No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed entity is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender its license to the board. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 5, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-24. - Separate license for each location. 
A separate license shall be required for each location of the licensee where distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages are to be sold. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 6, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-25. - Licensee building plans. 
No Class A, B, C, F, G or H license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages will be served has complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises and are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of Jackson County, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the State of Georgia. Each building in which the distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages will be served shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times, so as to reveal all of the outside of said building. Each applicant for a license shall attach to its application evidence of ownership of the building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. All premises for which a Class B-1, Class B-2, or Class C-1 license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by their guests. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 7, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-004, § 4, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 4-26. - Sale and delivery off-premises. 
No licensee holding a Class A, B, C, or D license shall sell or deliver any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverage to any person except on the premises as described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 8, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-27. - Restricted sales times. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages at any of the following times: 
(1)	On Sunday, except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. if the licensee has properly obtained a Class F, Class G, Class H, Class I or Class J license; 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local ordinance, regulation or special order of the board; or 
(3)	On all days except Sunday, between midnight and 7:00 a.m. for Class A-1 and A-2, and between midnight and 12:00 p.m. for Class B-1, B-2, and C-1. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 9, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-004, § 5, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 4-28. - Minimum age of consumption exceptions. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper identification: 
(1)	The term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including, but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an Act to require the state department of public safety to issue identification cards to handicapped persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. 
(2)	The term "proper identification" does not include a birth certificate. 
(b)	Sale to person under 21 years of age prohibited. No licensee or employee of same shall knowingly furnish, sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages to a person under 21 years of age. This prohibition shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages are being sold is 21 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 10, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-29. - Sale to intoxicated persons. 
No licensee hereunder shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 11, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-30. - Age of employees. 
No licensee hereunder shall employ, require or permit a person under 18 years of age to sell packaged wine or malt beverage or take orders and serve any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages. No licensee hereunder shall employ, require, or permit a person under 21 years of age to bartend or pour any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages, or take orders for any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 12, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-31. - Annual fee. 
The annual fee for licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)	Class A-1: $500.00 
(2)	Class A-2: $500.00 
(3)	Class B-1: $500.00 
(4)	Class B-2: $500.00 
(5)	Class C-1: $2,000.00 
(6)	Class D-1: $500.00 
(7)	Class D-2: $500.00 
(8)	Class D-3: $2,000.00 
(9)	Class E-1: $1,000.00 
(10)	Class E-2: $1,000.00 
(11)	Class F-1: $100.00 
(12)	Class F-2: $100.00 
(13)	Class G-1: $100.00 
(14)	Class G-2: $100.00 
(15)	Class H-1: $100.00 
(16)	Class I-1: $100.00 
(17)	Class I-2: $100.00 
(18)	Class I-3: $100.00 
(19)	Class J-1: $100.00 
(20)	Class J-2: $100.00 
and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. The annual fee shall accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check and will be refunded if the license is not issued. Additionally, a nonrefundable investigative fee in the amount of the greater of the actual costs of the investigation or $500.00 shall be charged. The amount of any fee set out hereunder may be changed upon resolution of the board. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 13, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-004, § 6, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 4-32. - Restrictions related to certain classes. 
(a)	Requirements for licensed caterers. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct a sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function or to any location not licensed hereunder without first having obtained a caterer's license as provided herein. 
(2)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that type of alcohol which is authorized by its alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)	Sunday sales. A Sunday sales license by the drink is required for Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(4)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer must comply with all local ordinances except for section 4-26 of this article. 
(5)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer must comply with O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3, Event Permits for Catered Functions. 
(b)	Wholesale licenses. Consumption on the premises of any alcoholic beverage of a wholesale dealer is prohibited. 
(c)	Excise taxes. In addition to all other taxes and license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the county in the business of selling malt beverages and wines as defined under the laws of the state, there is an imposed levy among all dealers described in this section within the unincorporated area of the county an excise tax to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(1)	The excise taxes on malt beverages and wine shall be that amount set forth in the schedule of excise taxes on file in the board of commissioner's office and the business office. 
(2)	Computation, payment. The tax imposed in the section shall be computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county shall as a condition to the privilege of carrying on the business: (a) keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments, or deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county for a period of one year, and such records are to be made available upon request from a duly authorized representative of the county (b) collect from each said retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county at the time of delivery of the malt beverage of wine the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and to hold such amount in trust for the county until such amounts are remitted to the county as provided in this section. 
(3)	Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81 or other applicable state law, on or before the 20th day of each calendar month, make a verified, and comprehensive report to the county business license office which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of malt beverages and wine to or for retail dealers in the unincorporated area of the county for the month preceding such report. Such report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer the amount collected under the terms of this section and such other information as may be called for by the county. This report shall be accompanied by remittance by the county for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(4)	Noncompliance by wholesale dealer. If any wholesale dealer fails to or refuses to make the report provided for in this section the county shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the county may revoke the wholesale dealers license. In addition, such wholesale dealer may pay a late payment charge of ten percent per month for each month delinquency together with interest on the total amount due including the late payment fee equal to one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 14, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 12-004, § 7, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 4-33. - Inspection. 
The premises of the holder of a license for the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections by the county, state or federal authorities. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 15, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-34. - False statements. 
The making of any statement on an application for a license which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 16, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-35. - No gambling. 
Except for the State of Georgia lottery, there shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries or tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes of hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by licensee, and any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 17, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-36. - Display of licenses. 
Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 18, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-37. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
No person shall engage in the sale of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages in the county without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this article. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)	The making of any false statement either in or in connection with the application for a license issued hereunder, which shall be later found to be false; 
(2)	All licenses issued hereunder are conditioned upon faithful compliance with the rules and regulations set out in this article, and the laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Georgia and the ordinances of Jackson County; 
(3)	Whenever it can be shown that a licensee hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever; lawfully owing to the county; 
(4)	Suspension or revocation of any applicable state license shall automatically operate to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder; 
(5)	Failure to conform to the definition of a licensee; or 
(6)	For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
Any action taken by the board to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, shall not preclude, and may be in addition to, any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and ordinances of the county, the State of Georgia, or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the board to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the board shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken and state the reasons therefor. The licensee shall have 15 days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the board. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 19, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-38. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 20, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-39. - Invalidity of part. 
Should any sentence, section, subsection or provision of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole nor any part thereof that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 21, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-40. - Excise taxes. 
The county shall charge the maximum excise tax allowable, as amended from time to time by the provisions of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 22, 12-21-2009) 
Sec. 4-41. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of a section or subsection of this article shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 23, 12-21-2009) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARD ROOMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Area of operation means the unincorporated area of the county in the case of counties and the territory located within the corporate limits of the municipality in the case of municipalities. 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and includes all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," and "English billiards." 
Entire premises means to completely close the establishment such that no business of any nature is transacted. 
Governing authority means the official or group or body of officials of a county or municipality authorized to exercise the legislative powers of the county or municipality. 
Local government means the governing authority of any county or municipality of this state. 
(Code 2005, 6-31; Ord. of 10-26-1995) 
Sec. 6-20. - Operating rules. 
No person shall operate a pool room, billiard table, pool table or billiard room whereon charges are made for these of such pool room, billiard table, pool table or billiard room, except under the following rules: 
(1)	Such billiard room shall always be open to the inspection of the law enforcement body of the county during operating hours. 
(2)	No billiard or pool tables shall be operated or played upon except when such billiard or pool table is in a room located on the ground floor of a building in the county. 
(3)	Such billiard room shall not be allowed to operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. if the other aspects of the business remain open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. If the operator of the billiard room agrees to close the entire premises, the hours of nonoperation shall be as follows: 
a.	Monday 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday. 
b.	Tuesday 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Tuesday. 
c.	Wednesday 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Wednesday. 
d.	Thursday 12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Thursday. 
e.	Friday12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Friday. 
f.	Saturday 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Saturday. 
g.	Sunday 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Sunday. 
(4)	No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed or possessed on premises. 
(Code 2005, 6-32; Ord. of 10-26-1995) 
Sec. 6-21. - Occupational tax. 
Payment of the occupational tax is required for the operation of the business that has a billiard room on its premises. 
(Code 2005, 6-33) 
Secs. 6-22—6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-46. - Findings; purpose. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, New York, New York, Mecklenberg County, North Carolina and DeKalb County, Georgia which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the county; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement professional who is familiar with conditions resulting in other nearby localities, and on documentary evidence submitted to the board of commissioners, the county board of commissioners takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. Testimony and studies relied upon in the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived include the following: 
(1)	Erotic/Exotic Dancing: HIV-Related Risk Factors (1998). 
Dr. Jacqueline Lewis 
Dr. Eleanor Maticka-Tyndale 
Department of Sociology and Anthropology 
University of Windsor 410 Sunset Avenue 
Windsor, Ontario N9B 3P4 
(2)	Report on the Secondary Effects of the Concentration of Adult Use Establishments in the Times Square Area (1994). 
Insight Associates 
Times Square Business Improvement District 
1560 Broadway, Suite 800 
New York, NY 10036 
(3)	Adult Entertainment and the Secondary Effects Doctrine (2002). How a zoning regulation may affect First Amendment Rights, David L. Hudson, Jr. 
(4)	Measuring Secondary Effects of Adult Businesses Using Spatio-Temporal Estimation of Real Estate Price Appreciation (2001). 
Henry Renski 
Daniel Linz 
George W. McCarthy 
21 Cramer Road 
Rhinebeck, NY 12572 
(5)	Preventing the Secondary Effects of Adult Entertainment Establishments: Is Zoning the Solution (1997), Dana M. Tucker. 
(6)	Adult Entertainment and The First Amendment (2002). A Dialogue and Analysis with the Industry's Leading Litigator and Appellate Advocate, Clay Calvert and Robert D. Richards. 
(7)	Testimony of Don Gary, Senior Assistant District Attorney for Dekalb County, Georgia, regarding the undesirable secondary social effects of the presence and operation of adult entertainment establishments. 
a.	It is the finding of the board of commissioners of the county that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment, (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
b.	Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The board of commissioners finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the county, as well. Furthermore, it is the finding of the county board of commissioners that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
c.	The board of commissioners finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the county are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells videotapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the board of commissioners has been made aware of Gwinnett County's experience with the adult bookstore located within the county on Jimmy Carter Boulevard which has shown that a substantial amount of activity at that bookstore involves booths which an individual may enter, view videos depicting sexual activity, and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
d.	The board of commissioners of the county, therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the board of commissioners of the county finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The board finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 6-47. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the 1993 edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. The term "adult entertainers" include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment. 
(1)	The term "adult entertainment establishment" means and includes the following types of business: 
a.	Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; 
b.	Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined herein; 
c.	Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition; 
d.	Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities as defined herein or specified anatomical areas as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
e.	Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
f.	Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(2)	The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" does not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance; 
(3)	Any establishment that meets the definition of a sexually oriented adult use in the county UDC set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" includes, but is not be limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "playschool," or "preschool." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 30 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(3)	Any area that meets the definition of a sexually oriented anatomical area as defined in the county UDC as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)	Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(5)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(6)	Any act that meets the definition of sexually oriented activity in the county UDC as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 6-48. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county an adult entertainment establishment as defined in section 6-47 without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in this Code when the public development director fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this article. 
(b)	The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)	No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the county if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
(d)	There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the county in the amount of $750.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the public development director of the county within ten days after the public development director approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. 
(e)	All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the public development director on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall be assessed, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. 
(f)	All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 6-49. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operators shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 6-50. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)	Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of the county shall make application to the public development director of the county. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the county, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name of the operator as defined herein and of the owner as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $300.00 shall be paid to the public development director to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The public development director shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)	Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operators and owners; 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operators and owners; 
(3)	The previous addresses of the applicant, the operators and the owners, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operators and the owners are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)	The operators' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)	Two photographs of the operators at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)	The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operators and owners for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)	The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)	If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)	The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)	With respect to the applicant, the operators and the owners, all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of her criminal records to the county sheriff's office; 
(12)	A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operators; 
(13)	If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is being made is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)	At least three character references for the applicant, the operators and owners from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operators or owners and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The county shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operators and owners, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)	The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)	A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by the following: 
a.	If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.	If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.	If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.	If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)	Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the public development director and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)	Investigation; standards for granting of license. The county shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operators and owners. The public development director of the county shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The public development director of the county shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the public development director finds: 
(1)	The required $300.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)	The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)	Neither the applicant nor any of the operators or owners has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the state First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)	Neither the applicant nor any of the operators or owners has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by the county or any other county or municipality located in or out of the state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)	The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)	The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)	On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)	The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's day care facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)	The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the county, the state or the United States. 
The public development director of the county shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this article regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 6-51. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)	Location. Location of adult entertainment establishments shall be as provided in the Unified Development Code (UDC) as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)	Adult entertainment establishment employees. The following are requirements for adult entertainment establishment employees: 
(1)	Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 6-50(d)(3) within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" means the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)	Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (b)(1) of this section, he shall file a notice with the county sheriff's office of her intended employment on forms supplied by the county sheriff's office and shall receive a permit for such employment from the county sheriff's office. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of her criminal records to the county sheriff's office. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of her convictions of offenses described in section 6-50(d)(3), including pleas of nolo contendere, within the past five years. The county sheriff's office shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), then upon payment of the permit fee, the county sheriff's office shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. If such permit is not issued within 48 hours of such finding, the employee seeking the permit may commence work at the adult entertainment establishment which is the subject of the permit application without such a permit. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the county sheriff's office shall provide the prospective employee the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the board of commissioners, which shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. The annual permit fee shall be $25.00. 
(3)	Procedure for suspension or revocation of permit. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in section 6-50(d)(3) shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the public development director finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the public development director shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 20 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefor. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners, a $50.00 appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. 
(4)	Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)	Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(d)	Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)	Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)	Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(g)	Activities must be obscured from view. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 6-52. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)	Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)	Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)	Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)	Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)	Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 6-53. - Penalty for violation. 
Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 6-54. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 9) 
Sec. 6-55. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)	Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county and the state. 
(b)	Inspection of licensed premises. The county fire marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the county. 
(c)	Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The county sheriff's office shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 10) 
Sec. 6-56. - Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)	Grounds. 
(1)	A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements regulating adult entertainment establishments as set forth in this article. 
(2)	Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.	The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.	Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.	With respect to the applicant, operators and owners, conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 6-50(d). 
(b)	Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the public development director shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the director of code enforcement's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The director of the county's finance department shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the director of finance of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the director of the county's finance department shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the public development director denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the county, its officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20—9-6-28. 
(c)	Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the board of commissioners finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the board shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 11) 
Sec. 6-57. - Applicable codes, regulations or statutes regarding nudity or sexual activity. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 12) 
Sec. 6-58. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 14) 
Sec. 6-59. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)	Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.	Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall, have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
b.	All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
c.	The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.	The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)	Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2006, § 16) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment of an animal means the act of any person who: 
(1)	Abandons an animal by leaving an animal unattended for a period of time in excess of 24 hours without food, water, adequate ventilation or shelter on public or private property, including, but not limited to, the property of the owner/custodian; 
(2)	Puts out, leaves, abandons, or in any other way discards any animal on public or private property, including, but not limited to, the property of the owner/custodian, and including, but not limited to, leaving an animal contained in a box, bag, fence, house or other structure or tethered; or 
(3)	Places an animal in the custody of a state licensed entity, such as but not limited to a veterinary clinic, grooming facility, boarding facility, or pet sitter for treatment, boarding, or other care, and fails to reclaim the animal by the agreed upon time. The entity shall abide by the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-14-490 in disposing of the animal. 
Abused animal means any animal that has been harmed by an act, an omission or neglect, including, but not limited to, any animal that has been: 
(1)	Deprived of adequate food, water, shelter, ventilation, care, space, or veterinary care. 
(2)	Physically harmed, tortured, mutilated, beaten, or illegally killed. 
(3)	Trained/used for fighting other animals. 
(4)	Used as bait to train/lure other animals to fight/kill. 
(5)	Deprived of proper exercise. 
(6)	Been left in a cage or crate for long periods of time in unsanitary conditions. 
Adequate means sufficient, commensurate, equally efficient, equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, satisfactory. 
Animal does not include fish or any pests that might normally be exterminated or removed from a business, a residence or other structure. 
Animal bite means any physical contact of the teeth, nails, or claws of an animal with human flesh, including, but not limited to, a scrape, puncture, pierce, scratch or tear, so long as bleeding results. 
Animal control facility/shelter means those facilities designated by the board of commissioners for the housing and care of animals pursuant to this chapter. 
Animal control officer means an individual authorized by local law or by the governing authority of the county or the covered municipality to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter. 
Animal control unit means collectively, the animal control manager and employees who are under the direction of the county manager, its successor departments, or other entity selected by the board of commissioners to carry out the duties of animal control for the county pursuant to this chapter and federal and state laws. 
Animal mill means an individual or entity that keeps and/or breeds animals in conditions where animals are frequently caged for extended periods of time, do not receive adequate care, and/or are not kept in an environment conducive to the health and well-being of the animals. 
Animal shelter means an entity that possesses a shelter license from the state department of agriculture. 
Attacking or biting animal means: 
(1)	Any animal which poses a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of an attack that caused property damage and/or physical injury. 
(2)	An animal shall not be an attacking or biting animal within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.	It inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. 
b.	The injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Bedding, adequate, means sufficient quantity of dry, noncontaminated, safe bedding, which is appropriate to the animal's age, size, species, and breed requirements. 
Board of health means the county board of health, or its authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of JCAC. 
Breeder means a person or entity that owns an animal and allows it to reproduce, whether planned or unplanned. 
Care, adequate/humane, means attention to the needs of an animal, including, but not limited to, the provision of adequate water, food, shelter, bedding, sanitary conditions, ventilation, heating/cooling (temperature control), space, exercise and veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain the health of the animal with regard to the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
Confinement means restriction of an animal to a home, basement, garage, building, pen, or other escape-proof enclosure. Confinement by a rope, chain, tether, fenced yard or other area accessible by other animals or persons, other than the caretaker, is not considered confinement. 
Costs means confiscation costs on potentially dangerous dogs, dangerous dogs or vicious animals are set by the board of commissioners or their designee and shall be paid by the owner to the county animal control. 
County animal control means the county animal control unit and shelter sometimes referred to in this chapter as JCAC. 
Dangerous dog means: 
(1)	Any dog that, according to the records of the county, has without provocation either: 
a.	Inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
b.	Aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of humans after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
(2)	A dog shall not be a dangerous dog within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.	The dog inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer executing official duties; 
b.	The injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Dead animal means a deceased animal including the carcass or parts of a carcass. 
Dispose of means: 
(1)	The sale of any live animal at public or private sale, the giving or adopting of a live animal to an individual/entity, or the transference of ownership of a live animal to JCAC or any licensed humane society, licensed rescue group or licensed veterinarian. 
(2)	Appropriate burial or cremation of a dead animal as directed in this chapter. 
Dog control officer means the manager of the county animal control or his designee who is responsible for enforcing the state dangerous dog laws. This term "dog control officer" is utilized by state law with regard to the state dangerous dog law. 
Domestic animal means any animal other than wildlife, wild animals, or exotic animals as defined by this chapter that is domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition. 
Effluent means an outflow or discharge of waste. 
Euthanasia means the legal act of putting animals to death using humane methods approved by the state department of agriculture. 
Exercise, adequate, means bodily exertion suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to maintain normal good health, muscle tone, nonaggressive temperament, and normal behavior. 
Exotic animal means any animal that is not indigenous to the state. 
Fence means a structure of wire, wood, stone or other materials, including invisible fencing, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. 
(1)	A fence does not include an invisible fence if the fence is: 
a.	Turned off or the animal is not wearing a properly operating signaling device; 
b.	Ineffective for any animal that has learned it can cross the fence line; 
c.	Intended to be a means of keeping people or animals out of an enclosed area; or 
d.	Buried in or adjacent to the county right-of-way. 
(2)	An invisible fence is not an acceptable means of control for an animal that is classified as vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous, or is in estrus/heat. 
Fighting animal/game animal means any animal that has aggressive parentage, or an animal bred and/or trained to: 
(1)	Exhibit aggressive qualities; 
(2)	Have no instinct to withdraw from a fight or to display signs of submission; 
(3)	Fight to the point of complete exhaustion or death with minimal provocation; 
(4)	Suppress the animal's instinct for self-preservation; 
(5)	Inflict maximum damage to the animal's opponents; 
(6)	Offer little or no indication that an attack is imminent; or 
(7)	Be ready/willing for combat and unyielding in combat. 
Food, adequate, means sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally adequate food, fed according to age, size, species and breed requirements, or as directed by a veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition or risk to the animal's health. Garbage or spoiled/rancid food is not considered adequate food. 
Foster home means a temporary home that cares for animals until they can be placed in a permanent home or returned to JCAC or its designee for adoption/disposal. Foster homes must be affiliated with and controlled by licensed rescue groups and/or licensed animal shelters. 
Garbage means all refuse matter/effluent. The term "garbage" includes, but is not limited to, animal or vegetable refuse, byproduct of a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment, spoiled/rancid food and refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise (that is normally discarded). 
Grid means a manufactured type of wood, plastic, or wire flooring specifically designed to be used in an area where an animal is housed. 
Hoarder means a person or entity that: 
(1)	Collects animals and fails to provide them with humane/adequate care; 
(2)	Collects dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this chapter; or 
(3)	Collects, houses, or harbors animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
Human exposure to rabies means any bite, scratch, or other situation in which saliva or central nervous system (CNS) tissue of a potentially rabid animal enters an open wound, fresh wound, or comes in contact with a mucous membrane by entering the eye, mouth, or nose. Touching or handling a potentially rabid animal with the possible exception of a bat or touching or handling another animal or inanimate object that has had contact with a rabid animal does not constitute an exposure unless wet saliva or CNS tissue entered a fresh, open wound or had contact with a mucous membrane. Likewise, contact with the urine, feces, or blood of a potentially rabid animal does not constitute an exposure since the pathogenesis of rabies is such that the virus follows nerve pathways and has only limited circulation in the blood. 
Humane society means a licensed organization that rescues, assists and provides care for animals, educates the public in humane care of animals, initiates/facilitates programs to improve the quality of life for animals. 
Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by JCAC. 
Licensed means having a valid license issued under the authority of the state. 
Lure means an animal used to bait/teach/encourage another animal to chase, fight or kill other animals. 
Manager means the manager of the county animal control unit or his designee. 
Neglect means absence of adequate care. 
Neglect, willful, means the intentional withholding of adequate food, water and humane care required by an animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, death, or other harmful/debilitating conditions. 
Nuisance animal means any animal that: 
(1)	Damages, soils, defiles, eliminates or defecates on private property other than its owner's property or on public property; 
(2)	Causes unsanitary or offensive conditions or otherwise endangers public health, welfare or safety; 
(3)	Causes a disturbance by barking, howling or other noisemaking for a period of more than 15 minutes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(4)	Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people; 
(5)	Is in estrus and not confined in a manner which can keep it away from intact males of the same species; or 
(6)	Causes serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of that property. 
Owner means any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of any animal subject to this chapter for five or more days. This definition is intended to embrace any person who is a custodian. 
Potentially dangerous dog means: 
(1)	Any dog that has without provocation bitten a human being on public or private property. 
(2)	A dog is not considered a potentially dangerous dog according to this chapter if: 
a.	The dog inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer in carrying out official duties; or 
b.	The injury inflicted was sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Primary enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a fence, building, room, pen, run, cage, stall, paddock, or pasture, that provides adequate space and shelter. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious animal securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of another animal or any person other than the owner or caretaker. The enclosure must: 
(1)	Be designed to prevent the animal from escaping, and: 
a.	If the enclosure is a fence, the fence must be high enough to keep the animal from climbing over and must be secured at the bottom to keep the animal from digging under. 
b.	If the enclosure is a pen or structure other than a fence, the pen or structure must have secure sides, top and bottom constructed or secured in such a manner to prevent the animal's escape, and be of a height and strength to maintain the animal within it. 
(2)	Provide adequate shelter. 
(3)	Provide adequate space for the animal. 
Provoked attack means an attack resulting when a domestic animal is placed in a situation such that an expected reaction would be to bite or attack. 
Relinquished means written transfer of ownership of an animal by the owner to JCAC. 
Rescue animal means a dog, cat, or other animal temporarily maintained by a licensed rescue group until the animal can be placed in a permanent home. 
Rescue group, licensed, means any individual or entity that houses and cares for rescue animals until permanent homes can be located and that maintains all required federal, state and local licenses/registrations. 
Restraint of animal means complete and immediate control of an animal by a physical device while under the direct supervision of a competent person. 
Running at large means any domestic animal not under the control and restraint of the owner or the owner's designee. 
Sale of animals means the transfer of ownership of an animal through verbal or written agreement to a new owner in exchange for money, goods, services, or fees. 
Sanitary conditions means animal living space free from health hazards, irritants, or conditions that may endanger or pose a significant risk to an animal's health. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing sanitation requirements or standards more stringent than normally accepted animal husbandry and humane practices as defined by this chapter and state law as regulated by the state department of agriculture. 
Severe injury means any physical injury resulting in any of the following: 
(1)	Broken bones; 
(2)	Puncture wounds; 
(3)	Lacerations, with or without, sutures; 
(4)	A medical procedure; or 
(5)	Death. 
Shelter, adequate, means protective cover for a domestic animal appropriate for the species and providing adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. 
(1)	Adequate shelter includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.	Sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; 
b.	Sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; 
c.	Sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and 
d.	Adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
(2)	Adequate shelter is structurally sound housing which provides an animal with: 
a.	Adequate space; 
b.	Four solid walls or an igloo-type of structure; 
c.	A roof; 
d.	A dry floor that is either: 
1.	Solid; or 
2.	Grids, provided the animal can easily stand, walk, lay and sit on the grids without its feet or body parts being caught, damaged, or injured. The grids and area under the grids must be designed so that they can be cleaned and sanitized; 
e.	An entrance; and 
f.	Adequate space for the number of animals on the property. 
(3)	Materials not suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Inadequately insulated containers; 
b.	Crates with exposed sharp edges; 
c.	Metal or plastic drums; 
d.	Abandoned or parked vehicles; 
e.	Porches or decks; 
f.	Lean-tos; 
g.	Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements; and 
h.	Any other structure that is not safe or suitable for housing the species. 
Space, adequate, means: 
(1)	Sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal; 
(2)	Sufficient space during periods of confinement, suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to permit the animal to turn about freely, stand, sit, or lie, move, etc. in a comfortable and normal position; or 
(3)	For sick or injured animals, confinement as directed by a veterinarian. 
State dangerous dog control law means O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., as amended. 
Strict confinement/isolation for animals bitten by rabid animal means confinement for the period of time recommended by the state and kept inside a home, basement, garage, or suitable building, and isolated from other animals and people other than the caretaker while the animal is being observed for symptoms of rabies. An animal within a fenced yard, on a chain, or otherwise in an area accessible in any way to other animals or persons other than the caretaker is not in a strictly confined area. 
Temperature control (adequate) means maintaining temperatures recommended for animals by the department of agriculture guidelines for shelters and farm animals. 
Tether means any chain, rope, leash, tie out or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. Acceptable temporary tethers include appropriate size chain, leash, rope or other tethering device that is of adequate length to satisfy the space and exercise requirements for the animal. In any event, any tether must be a minimum of ten feet in length. Tethering devices, as referred to in this chapter, are the type commonly used for the size animal involved and are attached to the animal by means of a properly fitted collar or harness. 
Training group, licensed, means an appropriately licensed organization or individual that trains animals to assist physically handicapped persons, to assist search and rescue operations, and/or to work with government agencies or law enforcement agencies. 
Unprovoked attack or without provocation means an attack that is not provoked as defined by this chapter. 
Unsanitary conditions means animal living space including shelter and exercise area, contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health, including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Excessive animal waste; 
(2)	Garbage, trash or effluent; 
(3)	Standing water or mud; 
(4)	Rancid/contaminated food or water; 
(5)	Fumes, foul or noxious odors, contaminated air, hazardous chemicals or poisons; 
(6)	Decaying materials; 
(7)	Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; and 
(8)	Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards, pits, poisons, sharp implements or other items that could cause injury, illness or death to an animal. 
Ventilation, adequate, means fresh air sufficient to provide for the health of an animal. 
Veterinarian means a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to diagnose and treat diseases and injuries in animals. 
Veterinary care, adequate, means medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
(1)	Ongoing infections; 
(2)	Infestation of parasites; 
(3)	Disease; or 
(4)	Any other medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
a.	Endanger the health or welfare of the animal; or 
b.	Promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Veterinary clinic, licensed, means a business facility where veterinary medicine is practiced. 
Vicious animal means: 
(1)	Any animal which: 
a.	Constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of an attack of such severity or intensity as to cause severe property or physical damage; 
b.	Makes an unprovoked attack on animals or on human beings; or 
c.	Intentionally attacks physical property in an effort to cause harm to a human or other animal. 
(2)	An animal shall not be a vicious animal within the meaning of this chapter if: 
a.	It inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer carrying out official duties; or 
b.	The injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, had in the past been reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Water, adequate, means clean, fresh water sufficient to prevent dehydration, properly sustain health, and prevent significant risk to the animal's health. For the purposes of this chapter, snow, ice or rancid/contaminated water are not considered adequate water. 
Wild animal/wildlife means any animal which is indigenous to this state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, and including any hybrid animal that is part wild animal. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Georgia Department of Agriculture, Animal Industry Division, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-13. 
Sec. 8-2. - Penalties. 
Except as provided for in section 8-14, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 for the first offense or by confinement in the county jail for a period of one day or by both fine and confinement. A second offense shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 or by confinement in the county jail for a period of two days or by both fine and confinement. Any subsequent offense may be punished by the maximum amount allowed for the violation of county ordinances by state law. Applicable court costs shall be levied in addition to any fine imposed. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Interpretation of chapter. 
(a)	Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(b)	Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability on the part of the county, or any employee, board or official which enforces or fails to enforce any of the provisions provided in this chapter or any provisions in the state dangerous dog law. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-3) 
Sec. 8-4. - Incorporation of state law; construction; other regulations. 
(a)	Incorporation. The state law known as the dangerous dog control law is incorporated in this chapter by reference and made part of this chapter. 
(b)	Construction. This chapter shall be construed to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing state laws as may relate to animals. 
(c)	Other regulations. Other provisions of law or regulations relating to this chapter shall apply when any provisions of this chapter shall conflict with the laws of the state or the United States of America. The laws of the state or the United States of America shall apply when this chapter is silent. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-4) 
Sec. 8-5. - Jurisdiction and interlocal agreement. 
The jurisdiction for enforcement of this chapter shall be in the unincorporated area of the county; however, the county may contract or enter into agreements with other municipalities to enforce this chapter for joint animal control services or for the provision of animal control services and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment for such services. Such agreements or contracts shall be subject to any state law, which may govern. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-5) 
Sec. 8-6. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer by taking or attempting to take any animal from any vehicle used to transport such animal, or by taking or attempting to take any animal from the animal control impounding areas, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his duties. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-6) 
Sec. 8-7. - Disposal of dead animal. 
(a)	Abandonment of dead animals; requirements as to disposal. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is caring for an animal which has died or has been killed to abandon the animal, its parts, or blood. Under no conditions may dead animals be abandoned at any location, including, but not limited to, in wells or open pits of any kind on private or public land. 
(2)	No person shall dispose of an animal, its parts or blood, by burial on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. 
(3)	Arrangements for proper burial must be made with a county official in order to dispose of a dead animal in a county landfill. 
(b)	Removal and disposition of dead animals within rights-of-way and on public property. Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be the duty of JCAC and the county department of transportation to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all county roads maintained either totally or in part from county funds. 
(c)	Methods of disposal of dead animals. Methods which can be used for disposal of dead animals are burial and incineration in a county approved incinerator. Disposal of animal carcasses by either of the approved methods must be completed within 12 hours after the death or discovery of the carcass unless the carcass is properly refrigerated or frozen. 
(1)	If incineration is chosen, the entire carcass must be reduced to ashes in the incineration process only in a county approved incinerator. 
(2)	Carcasses which are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level, but no more than eight feet, and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass. 
(3)	Mutilation of dead domestic animals is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Dead Animals Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-8. - Treatment of diseased or injured animals. 
When, in the opinion of the JCAC manager, an animal in the custody of JCAC is: 
(1)	Diseased or injured and in need of immediate treatment so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of communicable disease, the JCAC manager or designee shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(2)	Suffering needlessly due to a life threatening disease or injury, and a licensed veterinarian recommends euthanasia as the most humane course of action, and the JCAC manager or designee agrees that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing the animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized regardless of whether or not the normally required impoundment period has expired. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-8) 
Sec. 8-9. - Animals creating nuisances. 
The owner of any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the animal exhibits any behavior or engages in any activity defined under section 8-1, nuisance animal. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-9) 
Sec. 8-10. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs; registration; insurance; inspection. 
(a)	Certificate required. It shall be unlawful for any person to have or possess a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued by the county. No more than one certificate of registration shall be granted per person or owner for a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. No more than one certificate shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)	Conditions for issuance of certificate. Subject to the requirements of this section for dangerous dogs and subject to revocation for noncompliance and possible confiscation, the JCAC manager shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the JCAC manager sufficient evidence of the following: 
(1)	A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)	The posting on the premises of a dangerous dog sign obtained from the county warning that there is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on the property. 
(c)	Dangerous dogs. In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the JCAC manager evidence of either: 
(1)	Insurance. A policy of insurance in the amount specified by the state dangerous dog law, issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of a dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, provided: 
a.	It shall be the continuing and sole duty of the owner to provide the JCAC manager an updated and effective policy; 
b.	The owner shall notify the JCAC manager of any changes, renewals, and/or cancellations by written notice at least 30 days prior to any change, renewal, and/or cancellation; and 
c.	The county shall have the right to rely on the representations of the owner that to maintain the required insurance when the owner qualifies for the issuance of the certificate of registration; or 
(2)	Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount specified by the state and issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)	Fees. The certificate of registration must be renewed annually on the date the dog was declared a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. An annual fee to register dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs as set by the board of commissioners shall be paid by the owner to JCAC. 
(e)	Right to inspect. JCAC shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, which is required to be confined pursuant to this section, in its environment. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(f)	Notification within 24 hours of loose dog, attack, sale, etc. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide the dog control officer the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog, and notify the new owner of the designation. 
(g)	Notification within ten days of move into jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within ten days if the owner is moving within the dog control officer's jurisdiction or moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is moving out of the county shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. Likewise, any person moving into the county who owns a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall register the dangerous dog in the county within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)	Release from proper enclosure without due care or control a violation of chapter. Any person who releases a vicious animal either willfully through failure to exercise due care or control or who takes such animal out of such proper enclosure in such a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Dangerous dog control law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 8-11. - Control of animal. 
(a)	General control. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be out of his immediate control and restraint, or to be left unattended off the premises of the owner, or to be upon the property of another person without the permission of the owner or person in possession of such other property. For the purposes of this chapter, condominium and apartment common property shall not be considered to be the premises of the animal owner. Voice control may constitute control of an animal. 
(2)	Restraint of dogs and/or animals shall be maintained as follows: 
a.	When upon the premises of the owner, all animals shall be kept indoors or in a primary enclosure as defined by this chapter in such a manner as to contain the animal within the bounds of the owner's premises, or on a leash in the hands of a person that possesses the ability to restrain the animal. 
b.	When off the premises of the owner, all animals shall at a minimum be maintained on an appropriate chain, leash or tie not exceeding 12 feet in length, and in the hands of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the animal. 
(3)	The requirements of subsection (a)2 of this section shall not apply in the areas zoned for agricultural purposes or where the owner of the dog is using the dog for hunting or working purposes on property with the permission of the owner or person in possession of such other property. If the dog is being used for hunting purposes the owner shall have on his person a valid hunting license. Dogs, while hunting, or show dogs while being shown, are not required to wear a collar or dog tag; but the owner shall have the dog tag in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of JCAC. 
(4)	No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(5)	Every female dog and cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with an intact male of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(6)	Every animal shall be restrained and controlled so as to prevent it from causing property damage, harassing pedestrians or bicyclists, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, or attacking persons or other animals. 
(b)	Control of attacking or biting animal, vicious animals, potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs. 
(1)	The provisions concerning general control in subsection (a) of this section are applicable to attacking or biting animals, vicious animals and dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(2)	When upon the premises of the owner, attacking or biting animals, vicious animals, potentially dangerous dogs and dangerous dogs shall be kept indoors or in a proper enclosure as defined by this chapter. Permanent or temporary tethering as a means of enclosure is not permissible. 
(3)	The owner of a dangerous dog shall not permit the dog to be outside of a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person. The dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not more than six feet in length and under the physical control of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the dog. 
(4)	The owner of a potentially dangerous dog, vicious animal or attacking or biting animal shall not permit the dog or animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog or animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not more than six feet in length and is under the physical restraint of a person who possesses the ability to restrain the dog or animal. 
(c)	Evidence to prosecution. In any prosecution under this section, any animal found running at large may be held by JCAC as evidence of a violation of this section. Such holding is at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, and the animal may be released at the conclusion of the prosecution. 
(d)	Relinquishment in lieu of fine or jail. In lieu of paying a fine or serving jail time under this section, a violator may, at the discretion of the judge, relinquish the animal to JCAC for placement or disposal as determined by JCAC. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 8-12. - Attacking or biting animals. 
The owner of any animal that exhibits the characteristics or behavior as set forth in the definition of "attacking or biting animal" shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-12) 
Sec. 8-13. - Vicious animals; possession. 
(a)	The owner of any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the animal engages in any activity or exhibits any behavior as defined by this chapter under section 8-1, vicious animal. 
(b)	Upon being adjudicated guilty of or entering a guilty plea or nolo contendere plea to a charge made under this provision, the owner of the vicious animal, if allowed to maintain the animal will have to adhere to the following requirements for possessing a vicious animal: 
(1)	The owner must possess a proper enclosure to confine the vicious animal; and 
(2)	The owner must post the premises with a vicious animal warning sign. 
(c)	Right to inspect. JCAC shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a vicious animal which is required to be confined pursuant to this section in its environment. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)	Any person who releases a vicious animal either willfully through failure to exercise due care or control or who takes such animal out of such proper enclosure in such a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-12.1) 
Sec. 8-14. - Penalty for violation of section 8-13. 
For the first conviction under section 8-13, vicious animals; possession, the following penalties may be assessed: 
(1)	The convicted person may serve 60 days confinement; 
(2)	The convicted person may be fined $1,000.00; and/or 
(3)	The convicted person may be required to relinquish control of the animal in question to the county animal control and the animal will be dealt with in the discretion of animal control. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-12.2) 
State Law reference— Liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; municipal penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35(a)(2). 
Sec. 8-15. - Notice concerning attacking and biting animals; confiscation. 
(a)	Notice to the county. 
(1)	Any person having information an animal has bitten or attacked a person shall immediately report such information to JCAC. 
(2)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the owner of a vicious animal shall notify JCAC immediately, but in any case within 24 hours, if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the designation travels with the animal, and the original owner shall provide JCAC with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal, and the former owner shall inform the new owner of the designation. 
(b)	Confiscation of biting animals. Upon receiving notice that an animal has bitten or attacked a person, an authorized person from JCAC shall investigate the incident. Any animal determined to have bitten a person shall be immediately strictly confined and isolated for observation at JCAC or, at the owner's option, the owner may immediately take the biting animal to a licensed veterinarian. In the event the licensed veterinarian is closed or unable to take the animal at that time, the animal will be immediately transported to the animal shelter and held until the animal can be transported to a veterinary clinic. Regardless of the quarantine or confinement location, the owner shall be responsible for all expenses incurred. The biting animal shall be segregated and isolated for at least ten days from the date of the bite. 
(1)	Nothing shall prohibit JCAC from allowing an animal to remain in strict confinement on the premises of the owner subject to daily inspections by JCAC so long as the health, safety, and welfare of any person or animal is not threatened. Those animals may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	A female animal that is nursing offspring and that is current on her rabies vaccination. 
b.	A vaccinated animal if the animal has a medical condition, verified by a written statement from a licensed veterinarian, and confinement at JCAC or a veterinary clinic would be detrimental to the health and welfare of the animal. 
c.	An animal that is current on its vaccination and has bitten its owner, caretaker, or member of its family. 
(2)	No animal that is in strict confinement for biting shall be vaccinated for rabies until the end of the quarantine period. 
(3)	No animal that is in strict confinement shall be sterilized or undergo any other surgical procedure during the quarantine period unless the surgery is necessary for a life threatening medical condition or injury. 
(c)	Confiscation of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. In addition to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, after adjudication, shall be confiscated as follows: 
(1)	Dangerous dogs. A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by JCAC or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by JCAC if: 
a.	The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by section 8-10; 
b.	The dog is not validly registered as required by section 8-10, including the posting of warning signs; 
c.	The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
d.	The dog is outside of a proper enclosure in violation of section 8-11. 
(2)	Potentially dangerous dogs. A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
a.	Not validly registered as required by section 8-10, including the posting of warning signs; 
b.	Not maintained in a proper enclosure, or 
c.	Outside of a proper enclosure in violation of section 8-11. 
(d)	Return of confiscated dangerous dogs, potentially dangerous dogs or vicious animals. Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsections (b), (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs provided in this chapter. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The payment of reasonable confiscation costs and the return of a dog shall not bar or affect an action against the owner for violation of this chapter. A citation for noncompliance shall be issued in such cases. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-13) 
Sec. 8-16. - Prohibited animals. 
It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, own, possess, harbor or breed skunks, foxes, prairie dogs, raccoons, coyotes, wolves, hybrid wolves, any hybrid animal that is part wild animal, exotic cats or any other wildlife unless licensed by the respective federal or state department of agriculture to possess such animal. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-14) 
Secs. 8-17—8-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-36. - Animal control unit; unit manager; dog control officer; animal control officers; humane officers. 
(a)	Animal control unit. There is hereby created the county animal control unit, which shall have primary responsibility for animal control and welfare in the county. 
(b)	Appointment of unit. The unit manager of the animal control unit shall be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority. The unit manager may also be designated by the board of health as the official rabies control officer for the county. 
(c)	Powers and duties of unit manager. The unit manager shall be primarily responsible, with support from the county manager, for the enforcement of this chapter; and his duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Responsible for the operation of the animal shelter and the performance of such duties and the keeping of such records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(2)	Cooperation with the county board of health in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and of animal control directives. 
(3)	Cooperation with animal welfare organizations. 
(4)	Taking up and impounding animals which are in violation of this chapter, using any and all means available that are humane in nature. 
(5)	Housing animals at the animal shelter, or at any facility designated by JCAC to function or serve as an auxiliary shelter. 
(6)	Keeping a record of the number, description and disposition of all animals impounded or otherwise taken into custody, showing in detail in the case of each animal the following: 
a.	A general description by sex, breed and approximate age, together with any identification tag, vaccination tag or other marking, if any; 
b.	The date of receipt; 
c.	The date and manner of disposal; 
d.	The name and address of the person reclaiming or adopting; 
e.	The fees and charges; 
f.	The proceeds of sales received; 
g.	The condition of the animal when received; 
h.	Any treatment administered to the animal, including any drugs, medication or appliances; 
i.	The condition of the animal when reclaimed, redeemed, adopted or purchased; and 
j.	Such additional records as the board of commissioners may require. 
(d)	Identification. The animal control officers shall wear uniforms and badges containing individual names while engaged in the execution of their duties. The unit manager and assistant manager shall possess badges for use in the execution of their duties, but shall not necessarily wear uniforms. 
(e)	Dog control officer. The unit manager is hereby designated the responsibility of dog control officer, and shall carry out all duties provided for by the state dangerous dog control law for the county or any other local government pursuant to contract or agreement; and his duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, to make such investigation and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and dangerous dog owners within the dog control officer's jurisdiction. 
(2)	Notifying the dog's owner pursuant to the state dangerous dog control law when the dog has been classified. 
(f)	Enforcement by unit manager, animal control officer, humane officers. In addition to other duties, the unit manager, animal control officers and humane officers shall have authority to investigate all animal complaints and enforce the animal control ordinance and state dangerous dog law as applied in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-36) 
Sec. 8-37. - Fees. 
(a)	The fees with respect to all services performed in connection with enforcement of this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the headquarters of the JCAC and may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The fees established and collected under this chapter and pursuant to the state dangerous dog control law are not penalties but are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses borne by the county for animal control and welfare under this chapter and are subject to change at any time. 
(c)	The JCAC may waive any part of the normally required fees at their discretion. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-37) 
Secs. 8-38—8-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND ADOPTION 

Sec. 8-63. - Animals found running at large; notice to owner. 
(a)	Subject to the state dangerous dog control law and the provisions of this chapter relating to rabies control and the rules and regulations of the board of health and this chapter, any animal found running at large or otherwise engaged in any activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter or by the state dangerous dog control law shall be taken and impounded at the animal shelter. 
(b)	Any person may take into custody any animal running at large in violation of this chapter and place with the JCAC. 
(c)	Any person who takes into custody an animal running at large in violation of this chapter shall deliver such animal to the animal shelter without fee or charge. However, a person may house the animal for five business days while attempting to locate and/or contact the owner. Once in the custody of the animal shelter, the shelter shall hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been running at large and impounded by officers of JCAC. 
(d)	Upon receipt for impoundment of any domesticated animal found to have any means of identification, the JCAC shall immediately make diligent efforts to ascertain the identity of the animal's owner. If identified, JCAC shall, within 24 hours of receipt, telephone the owner to give notice of the impoundment. If JCAC is unable to contact the owner by telephone, it shall send notice of impoundment to the owner by certified mail. 
(e)	Diseased, injured, or pregnant animals, and animals in need of immediate veterinary care so as to lessen the suffering, prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, and/or to save the animal's life, shall be treated by or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian. If an animal is suffering from any life threatening disease or injury where life cannot be maintained and a slow death would be inhumane, and the licensed veterinarian and the JCAC manager agree that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing the animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized regardless of whether or not the normally required impoundment period has expired. 
(f)	Any licensed veterinarian who is caring for an animal during the period of impoundment shall immediately notify the JCAC manager if the animal dies. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-66) 
Sec. 8-64. - Taking; selling; impounding of owned animals. 
(a)	Any person who takes, steals, or deliberately lures a cat, dog or other domestic animal off the property of the owner without permission of the owner, or who deliberately releases such animal from the property of the owner, without the permission of the owner, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)	A law enforcement officer or the JCAC manager or his designee who takes an animal as directed in this chapter while performing his duties as defined by this chapter shall not be in violation of this section. 
(2)	An animal that has been injured, that is in danger, or whose health or safety has been compromised may be removed by the JCAC without being in violation of this chapter. 
(3)	Any JCAC officer who finds an animal in need of immediate medical care or treatment due to a life threatening illness or injury or finds an animal in danger, may remove the animal from public or private property if the removal is for the purpose of seeking immediate medical care for the animal, or is in the immediate best interest of the animal. If the animal is removed from a private residence, notice shall be left at the owner's residence advising the owner of the impoundment and reason for impoundment. Any animal impounded by JCAC will be returned only at the discretion of JCAC. All fees for impoundment and/or medical care must be remitted to JCAC prior to release of the animal. 
(b)	It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who, knowing the identity of an animal's owner, without permission of said owner does any of the following: 
(1)	Relinquishes the animal to JCAC without notifying JCAC of the animal owner's name and address; 
(2)	Relinquishes the animal to JCAC and falsely represents himself as the owner of the animal; 
(3)	Sells the animal; or 
(4)	Gives the animal away. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-66.1) 
Sec. 8-65. - Entrapment of animals by JCAC; methods, duration, access to food and water, etc. 
(a)	Trapping of animals by JCAC is permitted only if all of the following are complied with: 
(1)	The trap shall be a humane trap that is safe and nondebilitating; 
(2)	The trap must be placed in such a manner to prevent injury to children; 
(3)	Traps set to operate must be checked at least every four hours; 
(4)	Traps must not be set for more than four hours prior to the earliest possible transport to the animal shelter; and 
(5)	Traps can only be placed on public or private property with permission of the owner or lessor of the property. 
(b)	Trapped animals: 
(1)	Shall be given food and water as needed to prevent malnutrition and dehydration; 
(2)	May not be treated in a cruel or abusive manner; 
(3)	That are domestic animals and are seriously ill or severely injured shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian or the animal shelter for evaluation, care and disposition; 
(4)	That are domestic animals that appear to be uninjured and reasonably healthy shall be taken to animal shelter or returned to the owner if known; and 
(5)	That are wild animals or wildlife shall be taken to the animal shelter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-66.2) 
Sec. 8-66. - Period of impoundment or confinement. 
(a)	All periods specified in this section shall be deemed to commence at 12:01 a.m. of the day following the day of impoundment or confinement. 
(b)	Other than those dogs confiscated under section 8-15(b) or (c), 8-102, or article IV of this chapter, all impounded animals shall be kept at the animal shelter for a period of not less than five working days unless redeemed within such period. 
(c)	Wildlife or wild animals as defined by this chapter which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of JCAC shall not be deemed impounded and need not be retained for any minimum length of time. Wildlife and wild animals received by JCAC will be disposed of in accordance with federal and state guidelines. 
(d)	Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to JCAC shall be deemed permanently relinquished to JCAC and may be immediately adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as though it had been impounded. A surrender fee, as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, must be paid prior to release of the animal. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-67) 
Sec. 8-67. - Redemption; abandonment. 
(a)	The owner of any impounded animal may regain possession of the animal upon payment of all applicable fees specified in section 8-37 and compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such redemption shall not affect any criminal liability of the owner, which may exist with respect to any violation of this chapter and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this chapter. The following exceptions apply: Any animal impounded as a result of cruelty, abuse, neglect, or any other reason defined by this chapter as inhumane treatment may be retained by JCAC until such time as the case is disposed of in a court competent to hear such matters. 
(b)	Any impounded animal not redeemed within the period specified in section 8-15(d), or 8-66, whichever is applicable, shall be considered abandoned to JCAC, in which event all rights of ownership shall vest in JCAC; and the owner shall have no further claim to such animal. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-68) 
Sec. 8-68. - Adoption. 
(a)	JCAC shall endeavor to locate adopters for adoptable animals. No adoption shall become final until the termination of the impoundment period or confinement period provided for in section 8-66. No person under 18 years of age may adopt an animal and all adopters must provide proper identification prior to the adoption. 
(b)	As a condition precedent to adoption, all fees pursuant to section 8-37(a) shall be paid by the adopter. 
(c)	The unit manager shall have the right to refuse adoption to any person or entity who, for any reason, in the discretion of the unit manager or his designee, may be deemed unsuitable as an adopter. 
(d)	No transfer of any animal held at the animal shelter shall be valid without the written approval of JCAC. 
(e)	All animals adopted from the animal shelter shall be neutered or spayed prior to adoption. 
(f)	No person residing in the same household, nor any corporation, institute or other entity, may adopt more than three animals within any 12-month period; however, nothing shall prohibit JCAC discretion to donate more than three animals in a 12-month period, if the donation is in the best interest or welfare of the animal or it is in the best interest of public safety. 
(g)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, JCAC shall have the right to keep any animal which could otherwise be adopted or sold. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-69) 
Sec. 8-69. - Sale of animals. 
JCAC shall have the exclusive right to dispose of all animals that have been relinquished to JCAC, impounded or confiscated and not redeemed within the period specified by JCAC, in any manner deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the animal and in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-70) 
Sec. 8-70. - Destruction of animals. 
(a)	Subject to those dogs falling within subsections (b) and (c) of this section, any impounded animal within one of the following categories may be destroyed at the discretion of JCAC, in as humane a manner as possible: 
(1)	Any animal not redeemed within the periods specified in section 8-67 and section 8-15(d) or which by reason of age, disease, temperament or injury, is not considered adoptable or otherwise placeable, or when limitations on available kennel space at JCAC exist. 
(2)	Any animal, which is suffering excessively, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 8-66 has expired. 
(3)	Any animal, which presents a danger or exhibits a propensity for aggressive behavior towards any person or other animal, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 8-66 has expired. 
(b)	The owner of a dog confiscated for violation of section 8-10 shall have five days from the date the dog was confiscated to comply with the provisions of this chapter and pay reasonable confiscation costs to redeem the animal. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within the five-day period, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, as determined by JCAC. 
(c)	Any dog confiscated when the owner is in violation of the state dangerous dog control law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., or section 8-10) shall be destroyed as determined by JCAC only after there has been a conviction or order by the appropriate court under either of such sections. 
(d)	Any animal confiscated when the owner is in violation of section 8-13 may be destroyed as determined by JCAC only after there has been a conviction or an order by an appropriate court. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-71) 
State Law reference— Euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelter, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. 
Sec. 8-71. - Neutering and spaying. 
(a)	No impounded animal shall be neutered or spayed (sterilized) without the owner's consent until the period of redemption has expired, except any animal that in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian must be sterilized in order to save its life may be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian prior to the expiration of the redemption period. 
(b)	JCAC shall accomplish the sterilization of any animal whose period of impoundment has expired or that has been voluntarily surrendered to the county by: 
(1)	By JCAC sterilizing the animal prior to adoption. 
(2)	If the animal cannot be sterilized as required due to disease, medical condition, or for other reasons as specified by a veterinarian, then signed verification from a licensed veterinarian shall be delivered to JCAC by the adopter and the animal shall be sterilized upon recovery or as soon as recommended by the veterinarian. Any adopted animal not sterilized within the time specified may be reclaimed by JCAC. 
(3)	All adopted animals must be microchipped and registered prior to adoption, the price being included in the cost of the adoption. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-72) 
Secs. 8-72—8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-101. - Rabies inoculation; tag requirement for dogs, cats and ferrets. 
(a)	Insofar as the control of rabies is concerned, this chapter shall be construed and enforced consistently with any rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health. JCAC and the public safety director and his designees are authorized and directed to enforce any such rabies control rules and regulations which may be promulgated by the board of health. 
(b)	All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated by four months of age and revaccinated as recommended by the 2008 edition of the Compendium of Animal Rabies or a licensed veterinarian according to the type of vaccine and the duration of its effectiveness. 
(c)	Animals that may not be vaccinated for health reasons at the direction of a licensed veterinarian and those under the suggested age shall wear a collar with identification tags when off the property of the owner. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor or allow to be kept or harbored any dog or cat over four months of age without a collar, which shall have attached thereto a valid vaccination tag. 
(1)	Dogs, while legally hunting or working on agricultural property with permission of the owner, are not required to wear a collar with identification tags when off the property of the owner. 
(2)	Show animals are not required to wear a collar or rabies tag while being shown as required by this chapter; provided that the owner/handler shall have the rabies tag in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of JCAC. 
(3)	Animals that are housed at licensed kennels, shelters, or veterinary clinics are exempt from wearing collars and rabies tags provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and the veterinarian/caretaker has the rabies tag or proof of vaccination in his possession where it may be shown upon demand of a representative of JCAC. 
(e)	Any dog or cat entering the county for the purpose of a temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be exempt from the rabies tag provision of this section, but shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-96) 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 8-102. - Animals bitten by rabid animals or suspected rabid animals. 
(a)	Dogs, cats and ferrets current on their rabies vaccinations that are bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately, confined and observed for the recommended time set by the state. Confinement is the responsibility of the owner and subject to unannounced inspections by JCAC to ensure compliance. 
(b)	Unvaccinated dogs, cats and ferrets that are bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner is unwilling to euthanize the animal, the exposed animal must be placed in strict confinement/isolation for the period of time set by the state and vaccinated one month prior to being released from isolation. Confining the animal in strict isolation is the responsibility of the animal owner and subject to unannounced inspections by JCAC. 
(c)	Cattle and livestock that are current on their rabies vaccinations bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for the period of time set by the state. Confining the animal in strict isolation is the responsibility of the animal owner and subject to unannounced inspections by JCAC. 
(d)	Unvaccinated cattle or livestock bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal should be destroyed (slaughtered) immediately. Under special circumstances and with the approval of JCAC and the county health department, the owner may opt to keep the exposed animal under very strict confinement/isolation and close observation for the period of time set by the state. 
(e)	Any animal bitten by a suspected or proven rabid animal that is not destroyed and manifests any of the symptoms of rabies should be immediately examined by a licensed veterinarian. If the licensed veterinarian determines the animal is displaying symptoms of rabies and the symptoms cannot be attributed to any other illness or injury, the animal shall be humanely euthanized and JCAC shall be notified. 
(f)	All animals will be managed in accordance with the guidelines established in the most current edition of the state rabies control manual. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-97) 
State Law reference— Animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Secs. 8-103—8-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRUELTY AND RELATED OFFENSES 

Sec. 8-133. - Cruelty to animals; exceptions. 
(a)	Any person who abuses an animal, or aids another person in abusing an animal, or causes or permits an animal to abuse another animal, by acting or failing to act, shall be in violation of this chapter. Cruelty to an animal includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Willful neglect as defined by this chapter; 
(2)	Failure to provide reasonable remedy or relief for any injured or diseased animal; 
(3)	Overloading, overdriving; 
(4)	Beating, torturing, tormenting or mutilating; 
(5)	Abandonment; 
(6)	Killing any animal or causing the same to be done; 
(7)	Failure to maintain adequate care; 
(8)	Failure to provide adequate food; 
(9)	Failure to provide adequate water; 
(10)	Failure to provide adequate shelter; 
(11)	Failure to provide adequate bedding; 
(12)	Failure to provide adequate primary enclosure; 
(13)	Failure to provide adequate exercise; 
(14)	Failure to provide adequate space; 
(15)	Failure to maintain sanitary conditions; 
(16)	Failure to provide adequate ventilation; 
(17)	Failure to provide adequate temperature control; 
(18)	Hording or collecting animals as defined by this chapter; 
(19)	Owning, managing, obtaining, confining or caring for any number of animals in an animal mill as defined by this chapter; or 
(20)	Otherwise treating any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(b)	Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the requirements in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)	Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and JCAC personnel who euthanize animals under the direction of the JCAC manager per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, state department of agriculture and this chapter are not in violation of this chapter. 
(2)	A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121) 
Sec. 8-134. - Aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(a)	Prohibited. Any person shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of aggravated cruelty who knowingly and maliciously causes or aids another person or animal in causing or attempting to cause the death, physical harm or serious disfigurement of an animal by, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)	Rendering a part of such animal's body useless; 
(2)	Drowning, severely starving, severely dehydrating, strangling, suffocating, burying alive, or burning; 
(3)	Attempting to kill, abuse, maim, disfigure, dismember, mutilate or torture any animal; or 
(4)	Administering poison to any animal or exposing any animal to any poisonous or toxic/deadly substance. 
(b)	Exceptions. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)	Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and JCAC personnel who euthanize animals under the direction of the JCAC manager per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, state department of agriculture and this chapter are not in violation of this chapter. 
(2)	A person shall not be guilty of aggravated cruelty when the person is protecting his life, or the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him, provided that the person or animal being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.1) 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-135. - Abandonment of a domestic animal. 
(a)	Prohibited. Any person who engages in any behavior or activity defined under section 8-1, abandonment of an animal, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	Exceptions. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)	An animal that is deserted when premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster or emergency hospitalization shall not be regarded as abandoned under this article where the owner or custodian lacked sufficient time or resources to make reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal. 
(2)	An animal relinquished through a written agreement with JCAC, the Humane Society of Jackson county, other licensed rescue group, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the entity. 
(3)	An animal left unattended when its sole owner dies shall not be deemed abandoned, and shall be impounded by JCAC until JCAC can locate a family member to take custody of the animal. If a family member cannot be located, then the animal will be held in compliance with section 1-67. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.2) 
Sec. 8-136. - Fighting of animals. 
(a)	No animal shall be used for fighting. 
(b)	No animal shall be used to train other animals to fight. 
(c)	No animal shall be used as bait to encourage aggressive or fighting behavior in other animals. 
(d)	No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, train, lend, borrow, or handle any dog, cat, bird/fowl, or other domestic, feral or wild animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in any animal fight/fight training, exhibition of animal fighting or being used as bait for fighting/aggressive animals. 
(e)	No person shall train, assist, umpire/referee or in any way participate in the training of any animal to be used for animal fighting or used as bait or for animal fighting, or torment, badger or bait any animal for the purpose of fighting or blood sport training or any other such activity, the primary purpose of which is the training/conditioning of animals for aggressive or vicious behavior or animal fights or exhibitions of fighting animals. 
(f)	No person shall charge admission to, participate in, or be present as a spectator, handler, timekeeper, referee, guard, etc., at any animal fight/battle. 
(g)	No person shall profit from any activity connected with any animal fight or exhibition of animals fighting or training, or competitions or matches of fighting animals. 
(h)	Any animal found to be used in violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) of this section will be immediately confiscated by JCAC. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.3) 
Sec. 8-137. - Animal fighting/training arenas/areas. 
No person shall, for the purpose of any exhibition/occurrence of animal fighting, training for animal fighting, or training of animals to display aggressive behaviors: 
(1)	Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on premises owned or occupied by him; 
(2)	Allow a pit or other animal fighting arena or area whether permanent or portable, to be built, made, maintained, or kept on his premises; or 
(3)	Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit or other animal fighting arena or area, whether permanent or portable, on public or private property. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.4) 
Sec. 8-138. - Training equipment. 
No person shall: 
(1)	Possess, use, sell, give, trade, or loan apparatus, paraphernalia, pit supplies, implements, programs, drugs or equipment used to train or condition animals to be aggressive, aggressive animals, game animals, or animals used to train other animals to be aggressive. 
(2)	Use any animal as bait or as a lure in training dogs for racing or other competitions. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.5) 
Sec. 8-139. - Animals in motor vehicles. 
Any person shall be in violation of this chapter who: 
(1)	Transports an animal in a pickup or other open vehicle unless the animal is either: 
a.	Fully enclosed within the vehicle. 
b.	Protected by a belt, halter, tether, cage, container or other device that will prevent the animal from falling, jumping or being thrown from the motor vehicle and that will protect the animal from harm. 
(2)	Leaves an animal in a parked vehicle when temperatures inside the vehicle may adversely affect the animal's health and welfare. When the conditions inside a parked vehicle constitute an imminent threat to the animal's health or safety, any animal left in a parked vehicle may be removed from that vehicle by JCAC, any law enforcement agency, or fire agency. 
(3)	Leaves an animal unrestrained or unattended in any parked open vehicle. 
(4)	Leaves an animal in any vehicle where it must stand, sit or lie on extremely hot or cold surfaces including, but not limited to, truck beds. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.6) 
Sec. 8-140. - Impoundment of animals inhumanely or cruelly treated in violation of this article. 
Any animal that has not received humane care, that has been subjected to cruelty in violation of sections 8-133 through 8-135 or 8-139, or that is used or intended for use in any violation of sections 8-136 through 8-138 shall be immediately impounded by JCAC. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-121.7) 
Secs. 8-141—8-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 8-164. - Selling/giving away of animals; use of animals as prizes. 
Selling or giving away animals in front of or on private property or public property, other than the animal owner's property, without the owner's permission, is prohibited. A licensed rescue group, licensed animal shelter, licensed veterinarian, licensed pet dealer, or licensed humane society which has all required governmental licenses, registrations and has obtained permission from the owner of the business or property, may sell or give away animals on private or public property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Retail stores; 
(2)	Businesses; 
(3)	Flea markets; 
(4)	Yard sales; and 
(5)	JCAC property. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-135) 
Sec. 8-165. - Motorist hitting domestic animal to make report. 
Any person who strikes or causes injury to any domestic animal while operating a motor vehicle shall notify the owner of the nature of the injury and the location of the incident. If the owner is unknown, the person striking or injuring the animal shall notify JCAC, the county sheriff's department, or any law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-136) 
Sec. 8-166. - Exhibition of animals. 
(a)	Animal exhibitions will be permitted provided that the exhibitor: 
(1)	Has all valid licenses and permits that are required by the state, county or city available for inspection on demand; 
(2)	Abides by all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and guidelines that apply to such exhibits; 
(3)	Does not exhibit any animal that is ill or injured; 
(4)	Has a licensed veterinarian either present or on call to attend to any injured/ill animal; 
(5)	Confines/controls all animals to protect the public and the animals from harm; and 
(6)	Ensures that all animals are treated in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)	Legal exhibitions include, but are not limited to, petting zoos, circuses, dog shows, individuals or groups displaying/marketing animals for adoption or sale, etc., unless otherwise prohibited in this chapter. Animals that are high-risk carriers of rabies such as foxes, raccoons, and skunks shall not be exhibited in petting zoos or any exhibition where they can come in contact with people. 
(c)	Exhibitions of animals for illegal purposes as stated in local ordinances, this chapter, state and federal laws are strictly prohibited. 
(d)	No person shall in any manner or for any reason encourage, instigate, promote, assist, exhibit, organize, sponsor, host or participate in an exhibition/demonstration of the following types of animals including, but not limited to, those animals that are: 
(1)	Used or potentially used for fighting or training for fighting; 
(2)	Game animals; 
(3)	Bred with the intent to fight; or 
(4)	Aggressive animals. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-137) 
Sec. 8-167. - Sanitation. 
(a)	Animal owners must keep their yard, property, porches, balconies, decks, etc., reasonably free of animal feces. Animal waste will be removed in a timely manner by placing said material in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(b)	Persons who permit their animals to defecate on public or private property other than their own property are required to immediately pick up the feces, bag the feces, and properly dispose of the feces. Animal waste shall be removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's or public trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(c)	Any person found in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be in violation of this chapter, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)	Persons using guide dogs or assistance dogs are exempt from removing feces; 
(2)	Hunting dogs being used in a legal hunt with permission of the property owner; or 
(3)	Law enforcement officers working police trained dogs. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 1-138) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 10-18. - Findings. 
It is the desire of Jackson County to adopt, in all respects, the various National and International Codes relating to building, fire prevention, gas, grading, mechanical, plumbing and swimming pools and 
The adoption of these Codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by Jackson County relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the unincorporated areas of Jackson County and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(Code 2005, § 14-31; Ord. of 2-4-2002(1), § 1; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-001, § 1, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-001, § 1, 1-21-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-004, § 1, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-006, § 1, 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 10-19. - Adoption of building codes by reference. 
The following codes are adopted in full and copies of the codes are on file in the Office of the Jackson County Public Inspections Division of the Public Development Department where they are available for public review. 
International Building Code, 2012 Edition; 
International Fuel Gas Codes, 2012 Edition; 
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition; 
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition; 
National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition; 
International Fire Code, 2012 Edition; 
International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition; 
International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, less and except the plumbing and electrical requirements; 
International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition; 
International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition; 
as adopted by the State of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and as published by the International Code Council. 
These codes, along with all applicable Georgia Amendments, and applicable appendixes are hereby adopted as the Building Codes of Jackson County, which Building Codes regulate the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment use and occupancy location and maintenance of building structures, including permits and penalties, in Jackson County. Said codes, including the applicable administrative procedures in each code, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as though fully set out in this Section, provided that any provisions of said document text in conflict with other provisions of this article shall be deleted or modified. 
(Code 2005, § 14-32; Ord. of 2-4-2002(1), § 1; Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-001, § 1, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-001, § 1, 1-21-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-004, § 1, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-006, § 1, 12-15-2014 ; Ord. No 15-007 , § 1, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 10-20. - Inspections. 
(a)	Said Building Codes will be enforced by the county chief building official, building inspectors, development inspectors, code enforcement officers, public development director and/or other qualified persons designated by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	All building permit applications shall be examined for compliance with the following: 
(1)	Unified Development Code; 
(2)	The approved and recorded plat; 
(3)	To determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding and complies with flood control ordinances and regulations; and 
(4)	To inspect for systems, appliances or equipment which have become dangerous or unsafe; the term dangerous or unsafe systems, appliances, or equipment shall include those which are structurally unsafe, unstable, or unsanitary, constituting a fire hazard, or unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard due to obsolescence, or otherwise dangerous to life or property. 
(Code 2005, § 14-34; Ord. of 2-4-2002(1), § 2; Ord. of 2-12-2007, § 2; Ord. No. 10-04, § 2, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-001, § 2, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-001, § 2, 1-21-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-004, § 2, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-006, § 2, 12-15-2014 ; Ord. No 15-007 , § 2, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 10-21. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of the adopted codes herein, or the inspections required herein, shall for each such failure or violation or noncompliance be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and court cost, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days or be assigned community service for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each day any violation or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense and be subject to the above for each day. 
(b)	Any person who begins construction activity, to include clearing, grading and or installing a driveway entrance shall be subject to a penalty equal to the permit fee for the project. 
(c)	The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this article shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action. Flagrant and repeated violations, or acts or failures to act that constitute a safety or fire hazard shall authorize immediate revocation of any permit or license for the structure involved. 
(Code 2005, § 14-33; Ord. of 2-4-2002(1), § 3; Ord. of 2-12-2007, § 3; Ord. No. 10-04, § 3, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-001, § 3, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-001, § 3, 1-21-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-004, § 3, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-006, § 3, 12-15-2014 ; Ord. No 15-007 , § 3, 12-21-2015) 
Sec. 10-22. - Appeals. 
Actions and decisions of the chief building official, building inspectors, development inspectors, code enforcement officers and/or other qualified persons designated by the board of commissioners shall be subject to review on appeal in writing to the board of adjustments as the same may be constituted by the board of commissioners of the county, or, in the absence thereof, the county planning commission. A copy of the appeal shall be provided to the county public development department and the clerk of the county board of commissioners at least seven days prior to the hearing of said appeal. 
(Code 2005, § 14-35; Ord. of 2-4-2002(1), § 4; Ord. of 2-12-2007, § 4; Ord. No. 10-04, § 4, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-001, § 4, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 13-001, § 4, 1-21-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-004, § 4, 12-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-006, § 4, 12-15-2014 ; Ord. No 15-007 , § 4, 12-21-2015) 
Secs. 10-23—10-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 10-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 2005, § 14-61) 
Sec. 10-49. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this section and sections 10-50 through 10-53 when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are specifically designed: 
a.	For use by the handicapped; 
b.	To withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	As toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2) through (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the county. A fee as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 2005, § 14-62) 
Sec. 10-50. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector of the county. 
(b)	Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 14-63) 
Sec. 10-51. - Residential building construction. 
No construction may be initiated within the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 2005, § 14-64) 
Sec. 10-52. - Commercial building construction. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 10-51. 
(Code 2005, § 14-65) 
Sec. 10-53. - Residential/commercial construction. 
(a)	The requirements of section 10-51 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(b)	This article does not apply to any construction of a residential building, the contract for which was entered into prior to April 1, 1992, and shall not apply to any construction of a commercial building, the contract for which was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
(Code 2005, § 14-66) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Flea market vendors' records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-360; Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Palmistry licensing. 
(a)	A license fee for operating palmistry within the county shall be assessed at $1,000.000 per person per year. 
(b)	In addition any applicant for such a license shall comply with the requirements of any regulatory fees referenced in section 12-2 and article II of this chapter relating to occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
(c)	Failure to obtain a license from the county shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 18-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit, regulate or tax fortunetelling, astrology and palmistry and similar practices, businesses and professions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Sec. 12-2. - Provisions regarding business licenses and regulatory fees saved from repeal. 
Any ordinance regulating the issuance of business licenses or imposing occupation taxes and regulatory fees which is not printed in this Code is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 2005, § 18-2) 
Secs. 12-3—12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq. 

Sec. 12-23. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated portion of the county, whether with a location in the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state as set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. Such tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county marshal or such officer's deputies or to any law enforcement officer of the county upon request. 
(Code 2005, § 18-31; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 12-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, as defined in this section, for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize at least 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 2005, § 18-32; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 12-25. - Administrative fee structure. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $36.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, annual renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(Code 2005, § 18-33; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 4) 
Sec. 12-26. - Levy of tax. 
(a)	Generally. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated portion of the county and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)	Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of fulltime employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be amended and updated from time to time by the county: 

 
(c)	Fulltime or parttime employees. For purposes of the computation of the number of fulltime employees, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime employee and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce fulltime position equivalents. 
(Code 2005, § 18-34; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 5) 
Sec. 12-27. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax are hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the unincorporated portion of the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the unincorporated portion of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 18-35; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 6) 
Sec. 12-28. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 2005, § 18-36; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 7) 
Sec. 12-29. - Professionals. 
(a)	Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)	A fee of $24.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, with such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The fee applies to each person qualifying as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines. 
(b)	This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2005, § 18-37; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 8) 
Sec. 12-30. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2005, § 18-38; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 9) 
Sec. 12-31. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations may be taxed by the county pursuant to the pertinent general or local laws and ordinances. 
(Code 2005, § 18-39; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 10) 
Sec. 12-32. - Due date of tax. 
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year and succeeding years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable by January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county after April 1, 2004, or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days of beginning business, and a penalty of ten percent of the amount due or $50.00, whichever is greater, shall be imposed. The tax registration shall be issued by a designee appointed by the board of commissioners by resolution from time to time and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having so obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the county magistrate, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day such violation continues. 
(b)	At the time of payment of the tax provided for herein, each person liable for such tax shall make a sworn statement as to the number of persons employed by the taxpayer. 
(c)	In addition to the remedies set forth in this section, the county may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 2005, § 18-40; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 11) 
Sec. 12-33. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(Code 2005, § 18-41; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 12) 
Sec. 12-34. - Evidence of qualification. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence such requirements have been met. All businesses shall demonstrate compliance with applicable county ordinances and regulations if requested to do so by the county marshal. Additionally, any business required to collect sales and use tax shall demonstrate that it is properly registered with the state department of revenue and that it is properly reporting sales as occurring in the county. Such demonstration shall include the production of any records reasonably calculated to show such matters and shall occur prior to the issuance of a county business registration. 
(Code 2005, § 18-42; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 13) 
Sec. 12-35. - Liability of officers and agents. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Code 2005, § 18-43; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 14) 
Sec. 12-36. - Registration and delinquency. 
(a)	Each such registration shall be for the year in which the registration was obtained. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1 of each year. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required within 30 days of commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without having obtained said registration shall be subject to the general penalties provisions in section 1-12. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)	The registration herein provided for shall be issued by a designee appointed by the board of commissioners by resolution from time to time and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the county any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 2005, § 18-44; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 15) 
Sec. 12-37. - County marshal; subpoena and citation powers. 
The county marshal shall have full subpoena and citation powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 2005, § 18-46; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 17) 
Sec. 12-38. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355, which includes businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 2005, § 18-47; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 18) 
Sec. 12-39. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county on January 1 each year and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before April 1 each year. 
(Code 2005, § 18-48; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 19) 
Sec. 12-40. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the unincorporated portion of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the year. Any business commencing business after July 1 will only be required to pay one-half of the tax, but will pay all of the administrative fee. 
(Code 2005, § 18-49; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 20) 
Sec. 12-41. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the county marshal, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons liable for said tax, which shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the law. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff upon the property of defendant located in the county, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by law, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the county marshal against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 2005, § 18-50; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 21) 
Sec. 12-42. - Application to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2005, § 18-52; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 23) 
Sec. 12-43. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the county marshal to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the county marshal to inspect all registrations issued as often as in his judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is proper. 
(Code 2005, § 18-53; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 24) 
Sec. 12-44. - Full force and effect. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 2005, § 18-54; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 25) 
Sec. 12-45. - Public hearing before tax increase. 
The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 18-55; Ord. of 4-19-2004, § 26) 
Secs. 12-46—12-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BODY TATTOO/BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS AND OPERATORS 

Sec. 12-71. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this Rule is Chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (O.C.G.A. Chapters 31-40-1 through 31-40-9, and 31-5.) 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § I, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-72. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures and for the facilities where the procedures are provided. If followed, such standards should reduce the risk to the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § II, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-73. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or to a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § III, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-74. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative body or owner means the partnership, corporation, association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control or own the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and personnel, and who are legally responsible for the operation of the establishment. 
Antimicrobial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of microorganisms approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
Antiseptic means an agent or substance that will destroy or inhibit the growth and development of infectious microorganisms on human skin or mucous membranes. 
Applicant means any person who applies for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit, guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit or body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit. 
Autoclave or sterilizer means an apparatus, certified to meet generally accepted medical standards, for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a specific temperature over a period of time per manufacturer's specifications. 
Biohazardous waste means liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials and/or contaminated items, which if compressed, would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state. 
Blood borne pathogens means pathogenic microorganisms present in human blood that can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include but are not limited to Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), and Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Body tattoo/body piercing means the practice of physical body adornment by means of tattooing or body piercing. This definition does not include practices considered medical procedures by the Georgia Board of Registration in Medicine such as implants under the skin which are prohibited unless such medical procedures are performed by a person licensed by the Georgia Board of Registration in Medicine. 
Body tattoo/body piercing establishment means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license, if applicable, and permit from the county board of health where the practices of body tattoo and/or body piercing are performed whether or not for profit. 
Body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit means departmental approval in writing authorizing the administrative body to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment for the purpose of engaging in the practice or business of body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Health department approval shall be granted solely for the practice of body tattoo/body piercing pursuant to these regulations. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetrating the skin or mucosa of a client utilizing a single use sterile needle or other sterile instrument for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other adornment into the body for non-medical purposes; body piercing includes ear piercing, except when the ear piercing procedure is performed on the ear lobe with a single use ear piercing gun using sterile materials. (See definition for single use) 
Cleaning room shall mean the area in a body tattoo/body piercing establishment used in the sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment used for the practice of body tattoo/body piercing and shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of eight feet. 
Client or customer shall mean an individual upon whom one or more body tattoo/body piercing activities are to be performed. 
Contaminated means the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of blood, other body fluids, other potentially infectious materials, or potentially harmful chemicals on an item or surface. 
Contaminated waste shall mean any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials, as defined in O.C.G.A. 
County board of health or health department means the local county board of health, county health department, county health department office of environmental health, district office of environmental health, and/or district health director or any other designee/agent authorized to act on behalf of the local county board of health such as the Georgia Division of Public Health. 
Critical item(s) means those aspects of operation or conditions which, if in violation, constitute the greatest hazards to health and safety, including imminent health hazards. Critical violations shall include the following: 
(1)	Autoclave that does not meet minimum time, pressure or temperature requirements; 
(2)	Lack of a monthly negative spore or microbiological monitoring test for quality control; 
(3)	Non-disposable tubes and needles that are not sterilized or were sterilized greater than six months ago; 
(4)	Work area that is not equipped or stocked as required; 
(5)	Reuse of single use equipment or supplies; 
(6)	Sterile instruments are not properly handled; 
(7)	Reusable instruments are not handled properly; 
(8)	Employees with infectious lesions on hands not restricted from body tattoo/body piercing procedures; 
(9)	Employees not practicing proper cleanliness and good hygienic practices; 
(10)	Water supply not approved or hot and cold running water under pressure not available; 
(11)	Approved sewage and liquid waste disposal not available or improper disposal of liquid wastes; 
(12)	Cross connection allowing back-siphonage present in plumbing system; 
(13)	Readily available hand washing and toilet facilities not available for operators and employees; 
(14)	Insect and rodent evidence, harborage, or outer opening present; 
(15)	Toxic items not properly stored, labeled, or used; 
(16)	Unpermitted operator performing tattooing/body piercing; 
(17)	Prohibited procedures occurring within establishment. 
Decontamination means the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use, or disposal. 
Disinfectant means a solution registered as a hospital tuberculocidal disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and is intended to destroy or inactivate specific viruses, bacteria, or fungi on clean, inanimate surfaces. 
Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or handling. 
Ear piercing means the puncturing of the outer ear for non-medical purposes. 
Easily cleanable means that surfaces are readily accessible and made of such materials and finish and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods. 
Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
Establishment means the physical location of a business which offers and performs body tattoo/body piercing procedures 
Germicidal solution means any solution approved by the FDA which destroys microorganisms and is so labeled. 
Gloves means medical grade disposable single use gloves labeled for surgical or examination purposes. 
Guest operator shall mean a visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator possessing a guest operator permit issued by the health department. 
Guest operator permit means the issuance of a seven-day permit by the health department to allow a person to practice body tattooing/body piercing in accordance with these regulations under the direct supervision of a permitted body tattoo/body piercing operator. 
Hand sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold potable running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. The facility shall include a soap dispenser, soap, and single use disposable towels on a dispenser. 
Imminent health hazard means any condition, deficiency, or practice, as discovered by the environmental health inspector which, if not corrected, is very likely to result in disease transmission, injury, or loss of life to any person. 
Informed consent means the health department-approved statement that a client signs prior to receiving a body tattoo/body piercing procedure notifying them of the possible hazards of receiving a tattoo or piercing. 
Instruments means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body tattooing/body piercing procedure. 
Jewelry means any ornament used in any body piercing procedure which is inserted into a newly pierced area. Jewelry used shall be one of the following: Surgical Steel that is American Society of Testing Materials International (ASTM) F-138, International Standards Organization (ISO) 5832-1, or ISO 10993-(6,10 or 11) compliant; Titanium that is ASTM F-136, ASTM F-67, or ISO 5832-3 compliant; Niobium; Solid Platinum; Biocompatible Polymers Tygon, PTPE, or Bioplast; Glass such as fused quartz, lead-free borosilicate and lead-free soda-lime glass that can be autoclaved; or solid 14 karat or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with these standards, must be available for inspection on request. 
Microbiological monitoring for quality control means the use of a standard spore, to challenge the sterilization process. 
Minor means an individual under the age of 18. 
Notification of risk or disclosure statement means a framed, posted health department-approved statement which notifies clients of the possible hazards of body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
Occupational exposure means a specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact skin, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials resulting from the performance of an employee's activities. 
Operator means a person at least 18 years of age who performs tattooing or body piercing and who is responsible for complying with applicable provisions of these regulations. 
Operator permit shall mean a document issued by the health department pursuant to this body tattoo/body piercing regulation authorizing a person to conduct allowed body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
Personal protective equipment means specialized clothing or equipment, such as gloves or lap cloth, worn by an employee for protection against a hazard. General work clothes not intended to function as protection against a hazard are not considered to be personal protective equipment. 
Personnel means the permit holder, any person who performs body tattoo/body piercing, persons having supervisory or management duties, or any other person employed or working in a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. Such an individual may or may not be an operator. 
Physician or osteopath means a person licensed to practice medicine in Georgia. 
Proof of age means a driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or older, contains a photograph, and appears on its face to be valid. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitize means the application of a U.S. EPA registered sanitizer on a cleaned surface by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the microorganism level, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment in accordance with the label instructions. 
Sharps means any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa. 
Sharps container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is labeled with the international biohazard symbol. 
Single use means disposable products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are properly disposed of by appropriate measures after use on each client. Single use items include but are not limited to piercing needles, stencils, ink cups, razors, single use instruments, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, and protective gloves. 
Solid waste means refuse, garbage, trash, rubbish, and any other item(s) which could cause an unsanitary condition or undesirable health and safety conditions. 
Sterilization or sterilize means the use of a physical or chemical procedure by which all forms of microbial life, including bacteria, viruses, spores, and fungi are destroyed including highly resistant bacterial endospores. This is achieved by holding in an autoclave for 15 minutes, at 15 pounds pressure, and at a temperature of 250 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius, or any equivalent procedure resulting in complete destruction of microbial life including spores. 
Sterilized indicator means a tape, strip, bag, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. Micropigmentation is included in this definition. 
Ultrasonic cleaning unit means a unit approved by the health department with lid, physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of high frequency oscillations transmitted through the contained liquid. 
Universal precautions means treating all blood and body fluids as if they contain blood borne pathogens and taking proper precautions to prevent the spread of any blood borne pathogens. (See Appendix I [following this article]) 
Utensil means any implement, tool, or other similar device used in the storage, preparation, operation, or processing of body tattoo/body piercing. 
Violation correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting these rules and regulations of the local board of health. 
Waste means solid waste, sewage, blood and body fluids or other waste resulting from the operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § IV, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-75. - Administrative body. 
(a)	The administrative body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in Chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the local county board of health, including but not limited to all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)	The administrative body shall certify in its application the name(s) and exact duties of the operators who have been designated as being responsible for carrying out the rules and policies adopted by the administrative body. The following information shall be included: Valid driver's license or government issued I.D., date of birth (DOB), gender, home address, home/work phone numbers, ID photos of all operators. 
(c)	Prior to being granted a permit, each body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall develop a written statement of policies and standard operating procedures including: 
(1)	Sterilization. 
(2)	Employee health. 
(3)	Sanitizing areas and equipment between clients. 
(4)	Disposal of waste. 
(5)	Record keeping. 
(6)	Client screening. 
(7)	Aftercare procedures. 
(8)	Emergency sterilization procedures. 
(d)	Prohibited facilities. 
(1)	Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall not be allowed in the same facilities used for human habitation, any food service establishment, retail sales area, hotel room or similar areas. This does not prohibit body tattoo/body piercing operations in completely separated areas by walls and doors of these or other businesses. 
(2)	Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall not be allowed in automobiles, mobile, transitory or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include, but are not limited to, mobile trailers, tents, and recreational vehicles. 
(e)	Prohibited procedures. 
(1)	Implants or other procedures involving insertion of foreign objects completely under the skin, such as 3-D procedures, are prohibited. 
(2)	Any body tattoo/body piercing procedures which result in the permanent removal of tissue or requiring medical equipment (ex. Scalpels) shall be prohibited, except that a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to perform such procedures. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person to pierce the body, with the exception of the ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 for the purposes of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the body piercing is performed in the presence of the person's parent or legal guardian. The parent or legal guardian must have proper identification and sign a written consent form provided by the body tattoo/body piercing establishment. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. Nipple and genital piercing is prohibited on minors regardless of parental or legal guardian consent. 
(4)	No person under the age of 18 shall be tattooed, except that a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated], or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to do so. 
(5)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-5(b), it shall be unlawful for any person to perform permanent tattooing or cosmetic micropigmentation procedures within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket unless performed by a physician, licensed osteopath, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of a physician or licensed osteopath. 
(6)	No person except a duly licensed physician or a Georgia licensed laser technician under the supervision of a physician shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo. 
(f)	Body tattoo/body piercing operators shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(g)	Operators shall refuse services to any person who is or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(h)	Body tattoo/body piercing operators shall not provide service to any person who shows evidence of being mentally incapacitated. 
(i)	Live animals shall be excluded from within the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and from adjacent areas within the facility under the control of the permit holder. However, this exclusion does not apply to fish in aquariums. Service animals accompanying disabled persons shall be permitted in the establishment. 
(j)	The skin of the body tattoo/body piercing operator shall be free of rash, any lesion or visible sign of infection. A body tattoo/body piercing operator shall not conduct any form of body tattoo/body piercing activity upon any area of a client that evidences the presence of any rash, lesion or other visible signs of infection. 
(k)	No body tattoo/body piercing equipment or tattoo dyes and pigments shall be made available for use to non-permitted operators or establishments. 
(l)	Any future body tattoo/body piercing procedures not covered within these rules which have the potential for transmitting infectious disease must receive written health department approval prior to being offered to customers or patrons. 
(m)	Body tattoo/body piercing shall only be performed by currently approved body tattoo/body piercing operators in a permitted body tattoo/body piercing establishment meeting the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § V, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-76. - Personnel. 
(a)	Persons performing the body tattoo/body piercing procedures shall successfully complete a written examination specified by the county health department, obtain current certification in Red Cross Basic First Aid/CPR or equivalent, and proof of successful completion of an Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) approved Blood Borne Pathogen/Universal Precautions training program, at least yearly as required by OSHA. Training/courses provided by professional body tattoo/body piercing organizations/associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration. 
(b)	The body tattoo/body piercing establishment owner shall make available, at no cost to the personnel, Hepatitis B vaccination series, as well as any routine booster dose(s) to every person who may have occupational exposure to blood or other potentially infectious material. For new personnel, the vaccine shall be made available within ten business days of initial work assignment. 
(c)	Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and stating the reason the vaccine cannot be given. 
(d)	The owner or administrative body must maintain a file on all employees who perform body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Employee files must be kept on location and for a minimum of two years even after the employee is terminated. The employee files must be available for inspection and include the following: 
(1)	Report of Hepatitis B Vaccination, Hepatitis B antibody testing, or contraindication to Hepatitis B vaccine. 
(2)	Evidence of Red Cross Basic First Aid/CPR certification or equivalent and completion of an OSHA approved Blood Borne Pathogen/Universal Precautions training program. 
(3)	A copy of a photo I.D. 
(4)	A copy of the health department issued operator permit. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § VI, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-77. - Application for permit. 
(a)	The administrative body of each body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall submit to the local county health department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No establishment shall be operated and no body tattoo/body piercing performed without such permit, which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)	The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county health department. 
(c)	Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an 8½ inches by 11 inches or larger page containing a detailed floor drawing to scale of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following: windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables, sinks, bathrooms, waiting area, and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. Plans must be submitted and approved 14 days prior to construction of a new body tattoo/body piercing establishment or remodeling of an existing body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(d)	Specification sheets must be submitted for all equipment. 
(e)	A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the establishment shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(f)	The ownership of the establishment shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(g)	Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(h)	Existing establishments and personnel. 
(1)	Both body tattoo/body piercing establishments and body tattoo/body piercing operators in business at the date of adoption of the rules and regulations shall make application for a permit within 30 days of the adoption date. 
(2)	The health department may approve up to a 12-month period from the date of application for compliance of physical facilities of existing establishments; provided however, that no exemptions will be granted for circumstances presenting an immediate threat to public health such as lack of potable water, toilet facilities, waste disposal, adequate lighting, adequate sinks and lavatories, and universal precautions. 
(3)	Body tattoo/body piercing operators in business at the date of adoption of these rules must be certified in Blood Borne Pathogens/Universal Precautions and Basic First Aid/CPR certification within 90 days of adoption date. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § VII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-78. - Body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit. 
(a)	Any person planning to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall obtain a written application for a permit on a form provided by the health department through the local county health department prior to operating a body tattoo/body piercing establishment. 
(b)	A new or initial application is required for body tattoo/body piercing establishments that have not previously been permitted or for instances when ownership changes. To be eligible for a permit the establishment must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(c)	The local health department shall issue a body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit: 
(1)	Upon receiving a completed application and plans with applicable fees; 
(2)	After an inspection of the proposed facility reveals that the facility is in compliance with requirements of these rules. 
(d)	The establishment permit and framed "Notification of Risk" shall be displayed in within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an area where it can be read at a distance of one foot away. 
(e)	Permits shall expire on June 30 each year and are not transferable from one facility to another. 
(f)	A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the health department when the establishment ceases to operate, has moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended, revoked or expired. 
(g)	An establishment which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county health department pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-5 including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of its permit by the county/health department. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § VIII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-79. - Body tattoo/body piercing operator permit. 
(a)	No person shall practice body tattoo/body piercing procedures without first obtaining a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit from the county health department. 
(b)	An applicant for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit must be a minimum of 18 years of age and shall demonstrate to the health department his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and educational requirements of this body tattoo/body piercing regulation prior to the issuance or renewal of a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit by the department. 
(c)	Application for the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall include: 
(1)	Name. 
(2)	Date of birth. 
(3)	Sex. 
(4)	Residence address. 
(5)	Mailing address. 
(6)	Phone number. 
(7)	Place(s) of employment as a body tattoo/body piercing operator. 
(8)	Photo I.D. 
(9)	Proof of passing the departmental exam, successful completion of an OSHA approved Blood Borne Pathogen/Universal Precautions Training Program and Basic First Aid/CPR class approved by the health department. 
(d)	No permit will be issued without successfully completing an OSHA approved course in Blood Borne Pathogens/Universal Precautions, Basic First Aid/CPR and passing departmental exam. 
(e)	Individuals seeking a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall submit a completed application provided by the health department, pay a set fee determined by the health department, and provide proof of health department-required courses. 
(f)	Acting within the scope of the permit: A body tattoo/body piercing operator shall only perform those form(s) of body tattoo/body piercing that is/are indicated in the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit application submitted to the health department. 
(g)	The body tattoo/body piercing operator permit shall expire on June 30 each year and must be renewed unless revoked sooner by the health department. 
(h)	In order for a body tattoo/body piercing operator permit to be renewed, body tattoo/body piercing operators must attend a health department-approved educational class on Blood Borne Pathogens/Universal Precautions every year as required by OSHA, maintain current certification in Basic First Aid/CPR, and pay all applicable fees. 
(i)	All body tattoo/body piercing operator permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(j)	Guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit. 
(1)	The health department may issue one seven-day permit per year to a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator. Such guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit will allow a person to practice body tattoo/body piercing under the direct supervision of a body tattoo/body piercing operator holding a valid body tattoo/body piercing operator permit issued by the health department. The issuance of a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit is conditioned upon the applicant demonstrating the following: 
a.	The applicant has received training equivalent to the minimum training requirement set by this body tattoo/body piercing regulation; 
b.	The applicant shall provide a letter of consent signed by a health department-approved body tattoo/body piercing operator, a copy of the body tattoo/body piercing operator permit, and a copy of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment permit where the applicant will practice any body tattoo/body piercing procedures; 
c.	Paying a set application fee paid to the health department. 
(2)	No visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator shall practice body tattoo/body piercing without a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit issued by the health department. 
(3)	Any body tattoo/body piercing operator permitted by the health department requesting to have a visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator perform under his/her supervision shall: 
a.	Notify the health department in writing in advance of the proposed effective date of the requested guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit; 
b.	Require that the visiting body tattoo/body piercing operator obtain a guest body tattoo/body piercing operator permit from the health department. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § IX, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-80. - Client files. 
(a)	For each client, proper records of identification, body tattoo/body piercing administered, informed consent, and care instructions shall be kept and retained for a minimum of two years at the establishment or pre-approved location. 
(b)	Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the body tattoo/body piercing procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, date procedure performed, design, its location and name of the operator. 
(c)	A statement of informed consent approved by the health department must be read and signed by the person receiving the body tattoo/body piercing procedure and maintained in the client file. 
(d)	A signed statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)	A copy of instructions signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure shall be maintained on file. 
(f)	A copy of notification signed by the client informing them of the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the body tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § X, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-81. - Minimum standards. 
(a)	Each establishment where body tattoo/body piercing procedures are administered shall provide a work area separate from observers or visitors. 
(b)	All new body tattoo/body piercing establishments permitted after adoption of these rules shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space for each operator in the establishment. Multiple workstations shall be separated by dividers, nonabsorbent curtains, or partitions. 
(c)	At least one work area shall provide complete privacy for clients by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition. 
(d)	A body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall have a cleaning room to be used exclusively for the cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of instruments. 
(1)	The cleaning room shall have a separate National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) approved instrument sink or stainless steel instrument sink reserved only for instrument disinfectant activities and shall be equipped with hot and cold running water. 
(2)	The cleaning room shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of eight feet. 
(3)	The cleaning room shall be equipped with an ultrasonic cleaning unit that will remove all foreign matter from the instruments and a medical grade autoclave. The autoclave shall be used to sterilize all non-disposable and reusable body tattoo/body piercing equipment. 
(4)	The autoclave shall be separated from the ultrasonic cleaner and the instruments sink by a minimum distance of 48 inches, unless using a splashguard approved by the health department. 
(5)	In establishments that only tattoo, the requirement for an ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave may be waived if the establishment only stores and uses commercially purchased sterile single use disposable tattoo instruments. 
(e)	A wrist-action or foot pedal-operated hand sink shall be provided for each private workstation and for every two adjacent workstations. Hand sinks shall be no more than 15 feet of unobstructed distance from any workstation. Obstructions include, but are not limited to, doors. Establishments in operation prior to the adoption of these rules and regulations shall have a hand sink located within 35 feet of unobstructed distance from each workstation. 
(f)	The use of common towels and cloths is prohibited. Hand sinks shall be equipped with a soap dispenser and single use disposable towels on a dispenser. 
(g)	Hot water must be a minimum of 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(h)	At least one janitorial sink or one curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. Any hand washing sink and instrument sink shall not be used as a janitorial sink. 
(i)	Each location shall have the facilities to properly dispose of all waste material. All materials (e.g., needles) must be disposed of in accordance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(j)	Sanitary facilities and controls. 
(1)	Water supply. 
a.	Enough potable water for the needs of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be provided from an approved source that is a public water system; or a nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained and operated according to applicable state or local codes. 
b.	Water from a public water system shall meet 40 CFR 141 — National Primary Drinking Water Regulations and state drinking water quality standards. 
c.	Water from a non-public water system shall follow guidelines established in the Georgia EPD and Division of Public Health Memorandum of Understanding for Non-Public Water Supplies. 
d.	The most recent sample report for the non-public water system shall be retained on file in the body tattoo/body piercing establishment and results must be forwarded to the local environmental health office. 
(2)	Sewage. All sewage, including liquid water, shall be disposed of by a public sewerage system or by a sewerage disposal system constructed and operated according to law. 
(3)	Plumbing. Plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to law. There shall be no cross-connection between the potable water supply and any other water supply or other source of contamination. 
(k)	Toilet facilities. 
(1)	Toilet facilities shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. Toilet facilities shall be made available to customers. Public access to toilet facilities shall not be through cleaning rooms or work areas; however, for establishments in business prior to the adoption of these regulations, access through such areas may be allowed if the risk of contamination is determined to be minimal. 
(2)	Toilet rooms opening directly into work or client waiting areas shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-closing, solid doors, which shall be closed except during cleaning or maintenance. 
(3)	All toilet rooms shall have sufficient mechanical ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(4)	Toilet fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. A supply of toilet tissue on a dispenser shall be provided at each toilet at all times. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials. Toilet rooms shall have at least one covered waste receptacle. 
(l)	Hand sinks. 
(1)	Hand sinks shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. Facilities shall be of sufficient number and location to permit convenient use by clients and operators. 
(2)	Each hand sink shall be provided with hot and cold water tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. Any self-closing, slow-closing, or metering faucet used shall be designed to provide a flow of water for at least 20 seconds without the need to reactivate the faucet. 
(3)	An approved soap dispenser with liquid soap shall be available at each hand sink. A supply of single use sanitary towels shall be conveniently located near each lavatory. Easily cleanable covered waste receptacles shall be conveniently located near the hand washing facilities. 
(4)	Soap dispensers, paper towel dispensers, and all related fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(m)	Solid waste. 
(1)	Garbage and refuse shall be kept in durable, easily cleanable, leak proof and non-absorbent containers. Containers shall be kept in a clean and sound condition and disposed of according to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20. 
(2)	At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly or more often if necessary. All refuse containers shall be covered when not in use and maintained. 
(3)	There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all the garbage and refuse that accumulate. 
(n)	The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the entrance, harborage, or feeding of insects, rodents, or vermin. 
(o)	Floors and floor coverings of all work areas, dressing rooms, locker rooms, toilet rooms and vestibules shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent, durable material and maintained in good repair. Carpeting is allowed in the lobby area only and shall be of closely woven construction, properly installed, easily cleanable, and maintained in good repair. 
(p)	Walls, ceilings, and attachments. 
(1)	Walls must be painted, covered, or sealed in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Ceilings shall be maintained in good repair allowing for easy and effective cleaning. 
(2)	Light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans, and similar equipment attached to walls and ceilings shall be easily cleanable and maintained in good repair. 
(q)	Physical facilities. Floors, walls, ceilings, and attached equipment and decorative materials shall be kept clean and maintained in good repair. 
(r)	Lighting. 
(1)	Artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at least 50 foot candles of light on all work area surfaces and at equipment washing work levels. 
(2)	Artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at a distance of 30 inches from the floor at least ten foot candles of light in all other areas. 
(s)	All rooms shall have sufficient ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(t)	Poisonous or toxic materials. 
(1)	Materials permitted: There shall be present in the body tattoo/body piercing establishment only those poisonous or toxic materials necessary for maintaining the establishment and cleaning or sanitizing equipment, as well as controlling insects and rodents. 
(2)	Containers of poisonous or toxic materials shall be prominently and distinctly labeled according to law for easy identification of contents. 
(3)	Toxic items shall be stored separately from other forms of materials used in body tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(4)	Spray bottles containing cleaning solutions may be used for the purpose of cleaning but not while conducting a body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(u)	Premises. 
(1)	Body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be kept neat, clean, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(2)	Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be stored within the establishment. 
(v)	Animals: If applicable, all fish aquariums shall be cleaned and maintained in good repair. Reptiles are prohibited due to the possibility of Salmonella and other infectious microbes. 
(w)	Equipment and utensils. 
(1)	Materials. 
a.	Multi-use equipment and utensils shall be constructed and repaired with safe materials, including finishing materials; they shall be corrosion resistant and nonabsorbent; and they shall be smooth, easily cleanable, and durable under conditions of normal use. Single-service articles shall be made from clean, sanitary, and safe materials. 
b.	Re-use of single use articles is prohibited. 
(2)	Design and fabrication. 
a.	General: All equipment and utensils, including plastic ware, shall be designed and fabricated for durability under conditions of normal use and shall be resistant to denting, buckling, pitting, and chipping. 
1.	Body tattoo/body piercing operational surfaces shall be easily cleanable, smooth, and free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections, as well as free of difficult to clean internal corners and crevices. 
2.	Sinks and drain boards shall be self-draining. 
b.	Operational surfaces: Surfaces of equipment not intended as operational surfaces, but which are exposed to splash or debris or which otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be designed and fabricated to be smooth, washable, free of unnecessary ledges, projections, or crevices and readily accessible for cleaning. Such surfaces shall be of material and in such repair as to be easily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
c.	Needles, needle bars, needle tubes and pigments shall be designed and manufactured for the sole purpose of body tattoo/body piercing. 
(x)	Aisles and working spaces: Aisles and working spaces between units of equipment and walls shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees to perform their duties readily without contamination of equipment or of operational surfaces by clothing or personal contact. 
(y)	Minimum supplies of establishment: Each work station is to be equipped or stocked in the following manner: 
(1)	Body tattooing establishments: 
• A minimum of six sterilized needles (with bars), and six sterilized needle tubes; 
Body piercing establishments: 
• A minimum of six sterilized needles, six sterilized receiving tubes, six sterilized medical grade forceps, and six sterilized hemostats/sponge clamps. 
(2)	A minimum of four extra packages of disposable towels other than the package that is being used; 
(3)	A minimum of three extra boxes of medical grade disposable gloves other than the box being used; 
(4)	An extra supply of bandages, ointment or gel, and antimicrobial soap. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XI, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-82. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)	Furnishings of the body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings shall be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and non-absorbent. The establishment shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)	Cabinets and closed sealable containers for the storage of instruments, pigments, single use articles (e.g., gloves, ink caps, carbon, stencils, etc.) shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)	Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each operator. 
(1)	All exposed surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material, which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosion resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)	All exposed surfaces of work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a disinfectant solution at the beginning of each work day, after each procedure on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-83. - Supplies. 
(a)	Single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the work area and toilet facilities. 
(b)	All materials applied to the human skin, such as inks and ointments shall be commercially packaged and dispensed in single-use, disposable containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(c)	Only commercially packaged, single-use, sterilized needles shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XIII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-84. - Sanitation. 
(a)	All operator jewelry such as watches, rings, etc. shall be removed from hands prior to the start of a body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(b)	Prior to the start of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure, the operator shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage shall be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to not extend past the tips of the fingers to insure that gloves are not punctured. Recent tattoos or piercings in the healing process shall also be properly covered to prevent any bodily fluid transfer. 
(c)	Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential before and after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(d)	Before performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures, the operator must thoroughly wash hands in hot, running water with antibacterial soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. Use of hand sanitizers is recommended after each hand washing. Hand washing shall be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(e)	Medical grade single use disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the body tattoo/body piercing procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the body tattoo/body piercing procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. Hands must be thoroughly washed whenever gloves need changing and prior to the operator leaving the workstation. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one individual. 
(f)	A body tattoo/body piercing operator shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness, conform to standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body tattoo/body piercing procedures. Single use aprons, smocks, or sleeve covers are acceptable. Open-toed shoes shall not be permissible. 
(g)	The skin of the operator shall be free of rash or infection. No operator afflicted with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment in any capacity in which there is likelihood that the individual could contaminate body tattoo/body piercing equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(h)	Only single use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area receiving body tattoo/body piercing. 
(i)	Any item or instrument used for body tattoo/body piercing that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(j)	Universal precautions, as defined in these rules, shall be observed to prevent contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials. All employees shall be trained in universal precautions. 
(1)	Assume all human blood, plasma, serum, body fluids (semen, saliva, breast milk, vaginal secretions and any fluid contaminated with blood) and tissues to be contaminated with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Hepatitis virus, or bacteria such as Staphylococcus or Streptococcus. 
(2)	The most susceptible route of occupational infection for HIV, HBV, and HCV is by accidental needle sticks, but may include contamination of the mucous membranes, or through broken, abraded, or irritated skin. Use appropriate caution and maximum protection to prevent such contact. 
(3)	Proper decontamination procedures, emergency biohazard spill management, and proper use of biosafety equipment shall be utilized. 
(4)	Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(5)	All regulated wastes shall be disposed of in labeled, manufacturer's color-coded waste containers. 
(6)	Infectious material spills shall be cleaned using an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registered disinfectant and universal precautions. 
(7)	Clean all work areas and equipment used in handling human biohazardous materials with an EPA registered disinfectant when concluding work to protect personnel from accidental infection. 
(8)	Eating, use of tobacco products, applying cosmetics or lip balm are not permitted in the work area. 
(9)	All procedures shall be performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols which could transmit infectious material. 
(10)	Employees shall report all work related accidents, incidents, and unexplained illness to their supervisor and/or physician immediately. 
(11)	Soiled gloves shall be removed in a manner to minimize the risk of self contamination or cross contamination after each operation and prior to contacting work surfaces, door knobs, wall switches, or telephones. Dispose of used gloves in a bagged trash container. 
(12)	Food storage cabinets or refrigerators shall be located outside the work area. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XIV, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-85. - Instrument cleaning. 
(a)	Used non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaned. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(b)	Employees shall use personal protective equipment, protecting their eyes, nose, mouth and hands while cleaning instruments and follow manufacture's safety precautions for any chemicals used. 
(c)	Instruments shall be completely disassembled and must be cleaned by immersing in detergent and water in an ultrasonic cleaning unit following manufacturer's directions. The ultrasonic unit must be sealed and covered when in use to protect from aerosolization. 
(d)	After removal from ultrasonic cleaning unit, instruments shall then be brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, in a manner approved by the health department avoiding aerosolization, then rinsed in clean water and dried. 
(e)	Ultrasonic cleaning units shall be clearly labeled "biohazardous" and placed away from the autoclave and workstations and shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(f)	The ultrasonic cleaning unit shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications, emptied, thoroughly cleaned, and disinfected per manufacturer's recommendations after each use. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XV, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-86. - Sterilization. 
(a)	Cleaned Instruments shall be packed individually in sterilized packs and sterilized in a medical grade autoclave. All sterilized packs shall contain either a sterilized indicator or internal temperature indicator. 
(b)	Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, initialed, dated and sealed. Packages will no longer be considered sterile six months after the date of sterilization. 
(c)	Each autoclave bag must be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and may hold no more than one individual item (e.g., one tube or needle bar). A piercing set may be bagged together. 
(d)	The medical grade autoclave shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. The medical grade autoclave shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected daily. 
The autoclave manufacturer's instructions must be available at all times. 
(e)	After sterilization, the packaged instruments shall be stored in a clean dry cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved and labeled for storage of sterile instruments. 
(f)	If a sterilized package has been breached or allowed to get wet, the instrument(s) must be re-packaged and sterilized again before use. 
(g)	Spore indicators shall be used a minimum of at least once a month (unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer) and the results must be kept on-site for a minimum of two years. An independent commercial testing laboratory contracted by the administrative body shall perform monthly biological spore testing of the autoclave. A provision shall be included in the contract between the administrative body with the commercial testing laboratory requiring the commercial testing facility to notify the health department of any failure of the autoclave to eradicate all living organisms, including spores. 
(h)	Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function, and the operator shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report. Three consecutive negative biological tests must be achieved before the establishment is reopened. The establishment shall have the option to obtain a properly functioning sterilizer with a negative biological report in order to remain open or if the facility has more than one autoclave in operation they may be given approval to remain open. The health department may consider the body tattoo/body piercing establishment's emergency plan should autoclave failure or malfunctions occur. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XVI, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-87. - Dyes and pigments (ink). 
(a)	All ink shall be from commercial professional suppliers, specifically manufactured for the tattooing of human skin, containing an alcohol based preservative, and shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)	All ink shall be handled by using the following protocol: 
(1)	All bulk containers of ink shall not be used for longer than 12 months from the date of initial opening, and not longer than the manufacturer's expiration date. Each open bulk container must be labeled with the date the container is first opened. 
(2)	A supply of ink must be located at each work station and stored in a closed cabinet or drawer. 
(3)	Containers of ink may only be handled while wearing clean medical grade gloves. 
(4)	The tops of containers of ink must be disinfected prior to dispensing. After dispensing, the containers must be disinfected and immediately returned to their approved storage location before any tattoo procedures begin. 
(5)	All ink must be dispensed into approved single use containers. 
(c)	After tattooing, the remaining unused pigment in the single use container(s) shall be properly discarded along with the container(s). 
(d)	In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by the operator, only nontoxic single use materials shall be used. 
(e)	The Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) of all inks must be available for client review to assess any possible allergic reactions to ingredients. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XVII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-88. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)	All medical trays used in tattooing must be washed in hot water and soap and dried, then saturated with disinfectant prior to the procedure. 
(b)	Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment and during the tattoo procedure. 
(c)	Before the procedure begins, all utensils to be used in the tattooing must be placed on a medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, which must be placed on the disinfected medical tray. 
(d)	Only a commercially packaged single use pre-sterilized needle assembly with bar shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture proof disposable biohazard container. 
(e)	The use of some rotary pens is permitted. Any rotary pen that uses a sponge at the opening of the chamber to stop the pigment or body fluids from getting into the machine or is designed in a manner that does not allow it to be properly cleaned and sterilized is prohibited. 
(f)	Only rotary machines or other instruments that are engineered to prevent cross contamination through the use of detachable, disposable or autoclavable components shall be used. 
(g)	Sterilized instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(h)	Any part of a tattooing machine that may be touched by the operator during the procedure shall be covered with a disposable plastic sheath that is discarded after each procedure and the machine shall be disinfected. 
(i)	A clip cord sleeve and barrier film shall be used over exposed electrical cords or other cleaning and disinfection methods demonstrated to prevent contamination. 
(j)	All devices used to apply pigments must be designed and used to prevent backflow of pigments into the machine. 
(k)	Single use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(l)	If shaving is necessary, only single use disposable razors shall be used and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(m)	After shaving the area to be tattooed, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be thoroughly cleaned and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before each placement of design on the skin. 
(n)	When a workstation rinse cup is used alone, the cup and solution shall be disposable and discarded after each client. 
(o)	If squirt/spray bottles are used to dispense liquids, the liquid shall be applied onto a single-use wipe rather than directly onto the client. 
(p)	Single use ointment tubes, applicators, and supplies shall be discarded after each tattoo application on each patron or client. 
(q)	When a stencil is used in body tattooing for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single use and disposable. The use of roll-on or stick deodorants for tattoo site preparation is prohibited. 
(r)	The stencil shall be applied with antimicrobial soap or a health department-approved product dispensed from a container in a manner that does not contaminate the unused portion. 
(s)	When the design is drawn directly onto the skin, pre-sterilized, single use non-toxic pens or markers shall be used and discarded after each use. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XVIII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-89. - Piercing jewelry. 
(a)	Client and body piercer shall have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. Random jewelry shall not be used for the initial piercing. 
(b)	Jewelry used in piercing shall be one of the following: Surgical Steel that is American Society of Testing Materials International (ASTM) F-138, International Standards Organization (ISO) 5832-1, or ISO 10993-(6,10 or 11) compliant; Titanium that is ASTM F-136, ASTM F-67, or ISO 5832-3 compliant; Niobium; Solid Platinum; Biocompatible Polymers Tygon, PTPE, or Bioplast; Glass such as fused quartz, lead-free borosilicate and lead-free soda-lime glass that can be autoclaved; or Solid 14 karat or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with these standards, must be available for inspection on request. 
(c)	The jewelry must be free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and must be properly sterilized prior to use. 
(d)	All jewelry shall be sterilized in a medical grade autoclave, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(e)	Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by body piercers. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XIX, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-90. - Body piercing preparation. 
(a)	All medical trays used in body piercing must be washed in hot water and soap and dried, then saturated with disinfectant prior to the procedure. 
(b)	Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment for a body piercing procedure and during the procedure. 
(c)	Before the procedure begins, all utensils to be used in the body piercing must be placed on a medical grade absorbent liner that is waterproof on one side, which must be placed on the disinfected medical tray. 
(d)	Only a commercially packaged single use pre-sterilized piercing needle shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture proof disposable biohazard container. 
(e)	Pre-sterilize all forceps, hemostats, calipers, and tubes in sealed, properly labeled, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be cleaned and sterilized as required in these regulations. 
(f)	Sterilized instruments and jewelry shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(g)	Single use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the piercing site and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(h)	After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the piercing site shall be thoroughly cleaned and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before beginning the procedure. 
(i)	In the case of oral piercings, the operator shall provide the individual with antiseptic mouthwash in a single use cup and shall ensure that the individual utilizes the mouthwash provided. In the case of a lip, labret, or cheek piercing, procedures described in this section for both skin and oral piercings shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XX, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-91. - Body tattoo/body piercing aftercare. 
(a)	The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single use towel saturated with an antimicrobial solution. 
(b)	After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment or other approved product from a single use container or single use collapsible plastic tube. 
(c)	A bandage or dressing shall then be applied to the tattoo using a commercially packaged sterile sealed non-sticking pad or wrap. 
(d)	Verbal and written instructions, approved by the health department for the care of the body tattoo/body piercing procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection, file a report with the health department and shall contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. 
(e)	The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the local county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. A copy of the notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXI, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-92. - Disinfection of workplace. 
(a)	Each body tattoo/body piercing establishment must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a written cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. 
(b)	This written schedule must be based on the location within the establishment, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the establishment. 
(c)	The following procedures shall be adhered to: 
(1)	Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate EPA registered disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of each and every body tattoo/body piercing, and at the end of each work day. 
(2)	Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each body tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(3)	Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-93. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)	Needles or other sharp instruments used during body tattoo/body piercing procedures shall be placed immediately after use in puncture resistant, closed containers with a biohazard label. 
(b)	Used needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)	Filled sharps containers shall be considered regulated waste and shall be sent to a facility where they are either incinerated, rendered non-hazardous, or deposited in a landfill approved to accept biomedical waste in compliance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(d)	Regulated waste, which may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled, must be placed in a sealed bag. It must then be disposed of in compliance with Georgia Department of Natural Resources - Environmental Protection Division - Solid Waste Management - Chapter 391-3-4.15. 
(e)	Waste potentially contaminated with small amounts of blood or other infectious body fluids (e.g., gauze, wipes, disposable lap cloths), which does not meet the definition of regulated waste, shall be double-bagged in sealed, impervious bags to prevent leakage of the contained items. These bags shall be of sufficient strength to prevent breakage or leakage and shall not contain any sharps. The waste bags shall be containerized and disposed of in an approved sanitary landfill. 
(f)	Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)	Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of at such frequency to prevent the development of odor and the attraction of insects, rodents, or vermin. Solid waste shall not be stored outdoors unless in a secured and lidded dumpster, and in compliance with county/city solid waste ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXIII, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-94. - Inspections. 
(a)	The establishment and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county health department. 
(b)	A copy of the inspection report shall be posted within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an area where it can be read at a distance of one foot. 
(c)	Body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be inspected at least twice each calendar year. 
(d)	Environmental health specialists shall complete an Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) approved Blood Borne Pathogens/Universal Precautions course, and pass a departmental exam. 
(e)	Inspection results—Reporting and scoring. 
(1)	Inspection results for body tattoo/body piercing establishments shall be recorded on standard departmental forms. 
(2)	The scoring system shall include a weighted point value for each requirement in which critical items are assigned values of five points, with minor violations having assigned values of either one or two points. 
(3)	The rating score of the facilities shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations subtracted from 100. 
(f)	Violation correction. 
(1)	Correction of critical and minor violations shall be within five and ten calendar days, respectively. 
(2)	Upon declaration of an imminent health hazard which cannot be immediately corrected, the local environmental health specialist shall issue an order requiring the facility to immediately cease operations until authorized to reopen. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXIV, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-95. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. 31-5, Article 1. The health department shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Each county board of health shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of these rules and regulations within its jurisdiction and may include adoption of code by the governing bodies of counties and municipalities for the purpose of enforcement. 
(c)	The health department/county board of health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or of the rules and regulations. 
(d)	No body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall operate without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Any person who fails or refuses to file including, but not limited to, an order to cease and desist operating a body tattoo/body piercing establishment shall be subject to an injunction or other penalties from a court of jurisdiction. 
(e)	When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. 31-5, Article 1. 
(f)	If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. 
(g)	The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health department in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a body tattoo/body piercing establishment is in flagrant or continuing violation of this chapter. 
(h)	Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and body tattoo/body piercing procedures must cease immediately. 
(i)	The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing with the health department, upon request, within 72 business hours. 
(j)	If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health department not directly involved in the suspension. 
(k)	The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health department and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. 
(l)	The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. 
(m)	If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right to request an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, the owner may request an inspection to reinstate the permit. 
(n)	Notice of hearing. For the purpose of this chapter a notice of hearing is properly served when delivered in person or by registered or certified mail. 
(o)	Conditions warranting action. The health department may summarily suspend a permit to operate a body tattoo/body piercing establishment if it determines through inspection, or examination of employees, records, or other means as specified in this chapter, that an imminent health hazard exists. 
(p)	Resumption of operations. If operations of a body tattoo/body piercing establishment are discontinued due to the existence of an imminent health hazard or otherwise according to law, the permit holder shall obtain approval from the health department before resuming operations. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXV, 5-4-2011) 
Sec. 12-96. - Severability. 
If any provision or subpart thereof contained in this body tattoo/body piercing regulation is found to be invalid, unconstitutional, or in conflict with O.C.G.A. or a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of all remaining provisions or subpart thereof shall not be so affected but shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, § XXVI, 5-4-2011) 
Appendix I 
Universal Precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immune-deficiency Virus (HIV) and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38 No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immune Deficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, HCV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention; and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid-contaminated products. 
(Ord. No. 11-002, 5-4-2011) 
Chapter 14 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 14-19. - State of emergency; declarations. 
(a)	In addition to any and all powers enumerated in this Code, the chairperson of the board of commissioners shall have further emergency powers as set out in this subsection. The chairperson shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(1)	There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to an unexpected occurrence or set of circumstances demanding immediate action; 
(2)	Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of county streets or areas difficult or impossible; 
(3)	Civil unrest, commotion, or uprising is imminent or exists; and/or 
(4)	There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the county. 
(b)	The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the county shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(c)	After declaration of such emergency, the chairperson shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)	The power to use employees of the county to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb, and property of citizenry of the county; 
(2)	The power to close roads and to delineate areas within the county wherein an emergency exists; 
(3)	The power to impose emergency curfew regulations; 
(4)	The power to close business establishments within the affected areas; 
(5)	The power to close any and all governmentally-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; and 
(6)	The power to do any and all acts necessary and incident to the preservation of life, limb, and property of the citizenry of the county. 
(d)	No emergency power as set forth in this section may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the chairperson. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in this section may be extended. 
(Code 2005, § 22-31) 
Sec. 14-20. - Emergency operations plan. 
The county emergency operations plan, as approved on October 28, 2008, and revised on November 20, 2008, is incorporated by reference as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 22-32) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.; standards for ambulances, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-34; restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; emergency vehicle equipment, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-90 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.; authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep such act from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Nuisance, private, means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Nuisance, public, means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 2005, § 30-31) 
Sec. 18-20. - Proceedings to abate. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of the county, except for a nuisance excepted in this article, shall be abated in the following manner: 
(1)	Initiation. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the county clerk/treasurer, which complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance. In the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a county official or a citizen specifically injured by the nuisance. 
(2)	Notice of hearing. 
a.	Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the code compliance officer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the nuisance shall be a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, and calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the county clerk/treasurer, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the judge of the magistrate court. Such notice shall be served at least ten days and not more than 30 days prior to the date set for the hearing by any authorized officer of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's most well-known place of abode. 
b.	A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant. 
c.	Nonresidents of the state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or order in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. Where the address of such nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint or order shall be mailed to such person by registered or certified mail. 
(3)	Order of abatement. If, after hearing all the evidence, the judge of the magistrate court should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the judge shall issue an order. The order shall specify within what time the nuisance is to be abated by the defendant. If the nuisance is not abated within the specified time, the judge shall issue a writ directed to the police chief or any member of the police force, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party maintaining the nuisance. If the county removes the nuisance, the expenses incurred in the removal shall be paid by the owner. 
(4)	Effect of noncompliance. If there is a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the judge of the magistrate court, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
(5)	Penalty. Any person who shall erect or continue, after notice to abate, a nuisance which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general or corrupt the public morals, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 30-32) 
Sec. 18-21. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 18-20 shall prevent the board of commissioners from summarily, and without notice, ordering the abatement of, or abating, any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public, or a portion thereof, is in imminent danger. 
(Code 2005, § 30-33) 
Sec. 18-22. - Unfit buildings and structures. 
If there exists in the county dwellings, or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use, and are inimical to the welfare, and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the county, and a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures, power is conferred upon the county to exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the dwellings, buildings or structures. The International Property Maintenance Code and the International Existing Building Code apply to this section. 
(Code 2005, § 30-34) 
State Law reference— County duties as to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17. 
Sec. 18-23. - Public health hazard or general nuisance on private property. 
All provisions of this article shall be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or a general nuisance of the persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. 
(Code 2005, § 30-35) 
Secs. 18-24—18-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations regarding Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control may be found in the Unified Development Code (UDC) set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards for ordinances regulating land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 18-50. - Water supply watershed district established. 
(a)	The Curry Creek Reservoir Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Curry Creek Reservoir from the reservoir boundary to the ridge line of the watershed. The boundary of the watershed district is defined by the ridge line of the watershed or by the political boundaries of the county, where such boundaries occur within the watershed. The watershed district overlies the county zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)	The water quality critical area shall comprise all lands within the water supply watershed district. 
(Code 2005, § 30-103; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 2) 
Sec. 18-51. - Permit. 
(a)	Required. Within the water supply watershed district, no land disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempt activities identified in subsection (c) of this section, may be conducted without a permit from the county and such activities must be in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not permissible as of right or as special permit uses shall be prohibited. 
(b)	Temporary emergency permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other law to the contrary, the county planning and zoning director may issue a temporary emergency permit through oral or written authorization, provided a written permit is accomplished within five days, if the director deems that an unacceptable threat to life or severe loss of property will occur if a temporary emergency permit is not granted. The temporary emergency permit may be terminated at any time, without process, upon a determination by the county planning and zoning director that the action was not, or is no longer, necessary to protect human health or the environment. 
(c)	Exemptions. Normal agricultural activities involving planting and harvesting of crops are exempt from the permit and site plan requirements of this article if they conform to best management practices established by the state department of agriculture. Silvicultural activities must conform to best management practices established by the state forestry commission. (Note—Discussions of best management practices for agriculture and forestry are available from the state department of agriculture and the state forestry commission, respectively.) 
(Code 2005, § 30-104; Ord. of 9-8-1998, §§ 3.1—3.3) 
Sec. 18-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)	The county planning and zoning director, his agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make, or cause to be made, such examinations, surveys or sampling as the county planning and zoning director deems necessary. 
(b)	The county planning and zoning director is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement authority for this article. 
(c)	The county planning and zoning director shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits under this article; and address violations, or threatened violations, of this article by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders, and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(d)	Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the county planning and zoning director in the enforcement of this article. 
(e)	Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 or sentenced to six months in jail for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(f)	The county planning and zoning director shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 18-63. 
(g)	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the building or structure. 
(h)	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and restore vegetation, insofar as practicable. 
(Code 2005, § 30-105; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.4) 
Sec. 18-53. - Permit review. 
(a)	Site plans required. Applications for a development permit within the watershed district shall include site plans. Except for the exemptions listed in subsection (d) of this section, all forms of development within the watershed district shall be required to have a site plan, prepared and approved according to this article, before any building permit or other development related permit may be issued or any land disturbing activity may take place. (Note—A copy of the stormwater prevention plan, as submitted to the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, may meet the requirements of this subsection.) 
(b)	Required information. Each site plan submitted under this section shall include the following: 
(1)	A site plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements, including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways; water, wastewater and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
(2)	Location, dimension and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site, at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)	Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)	Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings, showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. The elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(c)	Development activities and site work. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the county planning and zoning director. 
(d)	Exemptions. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement of this section for detailed site plans: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings and mobile homes, as defined in the county UDC set forth as appendix A to this Code, constructed or located within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)	Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)	Construction of accessory buildings or additions to single-family residences. 
(4)	Ordinary maintenance. 
(e)	Preapplication conference. A preapplication conference is strongly encouraged between the applicant and the county planning and zoning director and can be scheduled at the request of the applicant. The purpose of the meeting is to review local land use restrictions, site plan requirements and the permitting process. 
(f)	Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the board of commissioners. The fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment and mitigation measures, as deemed necessary by the county planning and zoning director. 
(g)	Review. The application shall be made to the county planning and zoning director and will be reviewed and notice given to the board of commissioners within 30 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the county planning and zoning director. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the county planning and zoning director. If the review process is not completed within 45 days, the application is considered to be approved. However, they may extend the review period upon agreement of the applicant. 
(h)	Denial. If the permit is denied by the county planning and zoning director, then the same permit application cannot be considered until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the permit by the county planning and zoning director. 
(i)	Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the county planning and zoning director may be appealed to the county planning commission. The appeal must be made within 30 days of the decision rendered by the county planning and zoning director. 
(j)	Duration of validity. 
(1)	If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire. 
(2)	If construction described in the development permit is suspended after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date the work ceased. In cases of permit expiration due to abandonment or suspension of work, the landowner shall be required to restore the topography to its original contours and restore vegetation, insofar as practicable. 
(3)	Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the county planning and zoning director no later than 30 days prior to such expiration. 
(Code 2005, § 30-106; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 4) 
Sec. 18-54. - Land use restrictions. 
The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply to the water quality critical area: 
(1)	Hazardous materials handling facilities. New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
(2)	Hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities. New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)	Sanitary landfills. New sanitary landfills are permitted only if such facilities have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(4)	Agricultural land use. The application of animal waste on land must be accomplished in accordance with the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Agricultural Best Management Practices. 
(5)	Landfills and waste disposal utilities. Utilities that cannot be feasibly located outside the buffer or setback area must: 
a.	Be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
b.	Be installed and maintained to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
c.	Not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Code 2005, § 30-107; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 5) 
Sec. 18-55. - Impervious surfaces. 
(a)	Limitations. No more than 25 percent of the land area in the Curry Creek Reservoir Watershed may be covered by impervious surfaces. 
(b)	Setbacks. For all perennial streams within the water quality critical area, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream, as measured from the stream banks. 
(Code 2005, § 30-108; Ord. of 9-8-1998, §§ 6.1, 6.2) 
Sec. 18-56. - Vegetative buffers. 
(a)	Undisturbed stream buffers within the water quality critical area. For all perennial streams within the water quality critical area, a vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream, as measured from the stream banks. 
(b)	Silvicultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, forestry practices, in accordance with a forest management plan that incorporates best management practices approved by the state forestry commission, shall be permissible in the buffer areas. 
(c)	Agricultural BMPs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the continued cultivation of agricultural crops and the occasional pasturing of livestock shall be permissible within the buffer area, provided that the best management practices of the state department of agriculture are followed. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.3) 
Sec. 18-57. - Septic tank drainfield restrictions. 
Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area established in section 18-55(b). 
(Code 2005, § 30-110; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.4) 
Sec. 18-58. - Street runoff and drainage. 
New streets constructed within the water quality critical area shall not require any curb and gutter improvements additional to those required by the county UDC and the subdivision regulations in article 5 of the UDC as set forth in appendix A to this Code. New streets that cross perennial streams within the water quality critical area shall be designed in such a way as to avoid direct runoff from the paved surface into the streams they cross. Such design features shall be shown on the site plan. 
(Code 2005, § 30-111; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.5) 
Sec. 18-59. - Hazardous materials handling. 
New facilities located within the water supply watershed district that handle hazardous materials of a type and amounts requiring a permit from the department of natural resources or that require disposal at a hazardous materials facility by a hazardous materials handler permitted or licensed by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems. Such spill and leak collection systems shall be shown on the site plan, in detail, and must be approved, as part of the site plan, by the county planning and zoning director. 
(Code 2005, § 30-112; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.6) 
Sec. 18-60. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
All developments and land disturbing activity within the water supply watershed district shall comply fully with article III of this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 30-113; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.7) 
Sec. 18-61. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)	Existing uses. The lawful use of any building, structure or land, existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this article, except that the nonconforming building, structure or use shall not be: 
(1)	Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)	Increased in intensity of use; 
(3)	Reestablished after discontinuance for two years; 
(4)	Extended, except in conformity with this article; or 
(5)	Structurally altered, except for repairs necessary for the continuation of the existing use. 
(b)	Replacement, reconstruction or restoration. A nonconforming building, structure or improvement which is damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure, building or improvement, as determined by the county planning and zoning director, may not be reconstructed or restored to the same nonconforming use, except upon written approval of the county planning and zoning director. 
(Code 2005, § 30-114; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 7) 
Sec. 18-62. - Variances. 
(a)	Issuance. The county board of adjustments or its staff may authorize, upon appeal in individual cases, variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest. Variances will only be issued in cases where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. Such variance may be granted in individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the county planning and zoning director that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question, because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)	The application of this article to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the water quality of Curry Creek Reservoir or impair the purposes and intent of this article; 
(4)	The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; 
(5)	The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures that is not permissible in the district involved; and 
(6)	The variance will not result in an increase of the impervious surface of the development beyond that prescribed in accordance with section 18-55. 
(b)	Condition. The county planning and zoning director and/or the county board of adjustments may, as a condition of the variance to certain provisions of this article, require that alternative measures be taken by the applicant so that the purposes of this article may be achieved through alternative means. 
(Code 2005, § 30-115; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 8) 
Sec. 18-63. - Judicial review. 
(a)	Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the county board of adjustments concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)	Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the county planning and zoning director may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)	Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)	Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)	Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county planning and zoning director. 
(Code 2005, § 30-116; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 9) 
Sec. 18-64. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of the regulations set forth in this article in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 2005, § 30-118; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 11) 
Secs. 18-65—18-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROVE CREEK WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 18-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental, and reasonably related, to a main building on the same lot or the primary use of the property. The accessory building shall be of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. Signs and fences are not to be considered as accessory buildings. The term "detached accessory building" means a building that does not have a common wall with the main building on the same lot. 
Buffer, undisturbed, means a natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to a reservoir or perennial stream within a water supply watershed. 
Development means any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
Hazardous material means any contaminant as defined in this article, and any hazardous chemical for which a material safety data sheet must be filed under 42 USC 11021 and 11022. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency according to federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface, including buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
Land disturbing activity means any operation that involves excavation or filling of land, clearing of vegetation or construction, rebuilding or alteration of an existing structure. Such term does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities, yard and ground maintenance, individual home gardens, repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence or the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Nonconforming use means a land use activity, building or structure legally established prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or subsequent amendment thereto, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this article. 
Overlay district means a district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land use category. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of 1/24,000). 
Setback means the distance that defines the width of a protective buffer, measured from the boundary of the feature of the landscape (e.g., a wetland or stream bank) that the buffer is designed to protect. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads. 
Vegetated area means an undeveloped area, largely free from human disturbance, where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish and other wildlife. 
(2)	Outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, and skeet and trap shooting. 
(3)	Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(4)	Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the pervious nature of the land shall be minimized. 
(5)	Limited excavating, filling and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the permissible uses. 
Water quality critical area means the portion of the water supply watershed nearest the public water intake, where the most stringent land use limitations of this article apply. 
Water supply watershed means the drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 

(Code 2005, § 30-151; Ord. of 1-12-1999, § 13) 
Sec. 18-88. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)	Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation which threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of this county and Banks County; minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to the portions of the Grove Creek Reservoir Watershed, which occurs within the jurisdiction of the county and is identified in this article as a water supply watershed. 
(Code 2005, § 30-152; Ord. of 1-12-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 18-89. - Water supply watershed district established. 
(a)	The Grove Creek Reservoir Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Grove Creek Reservoir from the reservoir boundary to the ridge line of the watershed. The boundary of the watershed district is defined by the ridge line of the watershed or by the political boundaries of the county, where such boundaries occur within the watershed. The watershed district overlies the county zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)	The water quality critical area shall comprise all lands within the water supply watershed district. 
(Code 2005, § 30-153; Ord. of 1-12-1999, § 2) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; the Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 

Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Rules and regulations promulgated for the protection of environmental health and public health. 
The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health ("DPH"), including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)	Tourist Accommodations, Comp. R. and Regs. § 511-6-2. 
(2)	On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. and Regs. § 511-3-1. 
(3)	Portable Sanitation Contractors, Comp. R. and Regs. § 511-3-6. 
Copies of those DPH rules and regulations are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular county operating hours. 
( Ord. No. 15-001, § I, 1-19-2015 ) 
Secs. 22-2—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING REGULATIONS FOR COUNTY BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 

Sec. 22-19. - Statement of intent. 
The surgeon general of the United States has identified smoking as "public health enemy No. 1" in light of its role as the leading cause of premature death and disability in our country. The board of commissioners recognizes that secondhand cigarette smoke causes lung cancer in nonsmokers and is a major source of indoor air pollution and toxic chemical exposure for county employees. The board of commissioners, therefore, is dedicated to providing a healthy, comfortable and productive work environment for county employees. 
(Code 2005, § 42-31) 
Sec. 22-20. - Applicability. 
This article is applicable to all county employees, employees of other agencies, and the general public. The success of this policy will depend upon the thoughtfulness, consideration and cooperation of smokers and nonsmokers. All officers and employees of the county share the responsibility for adhering to and enforcing this article. 
(Code 2005, § 42-32) 
Sec. 22-21. - Distribution. 
Each elected officer and department head will be responsible for distributing a copy of this article to all employees and a copy of this article shall be posted on the primary employee bulletin board in each department or agency. The department head shall be responsible for providing a copy of such ordinance to each potential employee prior to employment. 
(Code 2005, § 42-33) 
Sec. 22-22. - Penalty. 
(a)	A violation of this article shall be treated just as a violation of any other ordinance of the county and shall be adjudicated in the magistrate's court of the county. 
(b)	The penalty for violation of this article shall be not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. In addition to such fine, or in lieu thereof, the judge of the magistrate's court may impose the performance of community service of not less than ten hours nor more than 50 hours for each such violation. 
(c)	The penalty imposed by the magistrate's court, notwithstanding any employee of the county who violates this article may be disciplined as for a violation of any other county policy as provided for in the county personnel system. 
(Code 2005, § 42-34) 
Sec. 22-23. - Prohibition. 
Smoking is prohibited in the county courthouse and the county administrative building, and all other county buildings. 
(Code 2005, § 42-35) 
Sec. 22-24. - Designation of smoking permitted areas. 
Outdoor areas only shall be designated as "smoking permitted" areas. 
(Code 2005, § 42-36) 
Sec. 22-25. - Signs. 
(a)	No smoking signs shall be placed throughout the buildings as deemed necessary. 
(b)	Signs displaying "Smoking Prohibited" shall be posted at the entrances of the buildings. Appropriate receptacles shall be placed at the entrances of all buildings for the disposal of smoking materials. 
(Code 2005, § 42-37) 
Secs. 22-26—22-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD SERVICE 

Sec. 22-54. - The rules and regulations for food services. 
The rules and regulations for food services adopted by the state department of human resources known as rules and regulations of food services, O.C.G.A. § 290-5-14 et seq., are hereby incorporated by reference, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived, and adopted as this section, the rules and regulations for food services. 
(Ord. of 4-21-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 22-55. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the violation of this article. Each day any violation of a section or subsection of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-21-2008, § 3) 
Chapter 24 - HUMAN SERVICES 

Sec. 24-1. - Indigent funeral expenses. 
The county shall cover the cost of funeral expenses up to a $300.00 limit for indigent persons. To be considered eligible for a funeral at county expense as an indigent, the person must be a bona fide resident of the county and must be declared as indigent by the board of commissioners of the county prior to services being rendered, after receiving certification as indigent by the county department of family and children services. 
(Code 2005, § 46-1) 
State Law reference— Disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-21 et seq. 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 26-19. - Findings. 
(a)	The board of commissioners has determined that false alarms are dangerous and costly to the citizens of the county. 
(b)	It is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county to impose regulations for false alarms. 
(Code 2005, § 50-31; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2)) 
Sec. 26-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the need for police at a premises in which such device or set of devices is installed. 
Alarm user means, with respect to any premises, any person who owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, leasing, management, or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Auto-dialer means any device or equipment designed or intended to call a predesignated telephone number in the event of an activation of the alarm system. 
False alarm means the transmittal of a request for response or assistance to the county sheriff's office under circumstances where no emergency warranting law enforcement protection existed at the time of such transmittal is made either automatically by an alarm system or by an individual in reliance upon an alarm system. 
Law enforcement officer means any sworn member of the county sheriff's office. 
Premises means any structure or improvement to real property or any such structure or other improvement which is intended for separate use and occupancy apart from other portions thereof. 
Response means the dispatch of a law enforcement officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated. 
Responsible person means, with respect to any premises, any individual or entity, which owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, management, or control is shared with other persons or entities and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Transmit means to send either manually or automatically, by any device or method, a signal to request a response for assistance from the county sheriff's office. 
(Code 2005, § 50-32; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 1) 
Sec. 26-21. - Penalties. 
(a)	For the fifth and each subsequent false alarm within a calendar year at a premises a fine from $50.00 to $500.00 shall be imposed upon each responsible person charged and convicted, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(b)	Any responsible person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this article may be summoned to the county magistrate court for each violation and/or noncompliance, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 2005, § 50-34; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 5) 
Sec. 26-22. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The provisions of section 26-25 shall not apply for parties responsible for newly installed alarm systems which have been connected for less than 30 days, and have been installed by a state certified and licensed alarm technician. A responsible person at a premises must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice from a state certified and licensed alarm technician, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)	The provisions of section 26-25 shall not apply to the owner or management company of a premises when such premises are leased for use unless the alarm system is under the control of the owner or management company. 
(Code 2005, § 50-33; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 6) 
Sec. 26-23. - Notification. 
For the first four violations of any portion of section 26-25 within a calendar year at any premises there shall be no penalty accessed. A first and all subsequent false alarms to a premises within a four-hour period shall be considered as one violation. The county sheriff's office shall notify any responsible person at the premises by United States mail following the occurrence of the fourth false alarm. Notice shall be deemed received by any responsible person if sent via United States mail addressed to the alarm user. 
(Code 2005, § 50-35; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 4) 
Sec. 26-24. - Maintenance of alarm systems. 
With respect to any premises, it shall be the joint and separate responsibility of each responsible person to cause any alarm system upon or within such premises to be maintained in a good state of repair so as to prevent the transmittal of a false alarm, or, in the alternative, to disconnect such alarm system. 
(Code 2005, § 50-36; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 2) 
Sec. 26-25. - Prohibited act. 
It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to: 
(1)	Transmit a false alarm. 
(2)	Notify the county sheriff's office directly through its emergency phone lines, including, but not limited to, lines bearing the prefix 911, of any alarm activation by means of any auto-dialer, telephonic recording, message, signal, or warning. 
(3)	Activate, except in the event of an actual emergency, any alarm system for the purpose of summoning a member of the county sheriff's office, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(4)	Maintain an alarm system featuring an audible alarm, siren, bell or horn without a properly functioning automatic cutoff system limiting the operation of the audible signal to not more than 30 continuous minutes. 
(Code 2005, § 50-37; Ord. of 7-11-2000(2), § 3) 
Secs. 26-26—26-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRIMINAL OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 

Sec. 26-54. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person operates a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning, or at a speed so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(Code 2005, § 50-72; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 26-55. - Disturbing meetings. 
No person shall create any disturbance at any public meeting or any place of amusement by loud talking, indecent or profane language, or any disturbing sound or action. 
(Code 2005, § 50-73; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 26-56. - Hindering or obstructing county officials, employees or agents. 
(a)	Obstructing or hindering officials prohibited. No person shall, by violence or threat of violence or by fleeing, or by any unlawful means, obstruct or hinder an official, employee or agent of the county (which for all purposes of this section shall exclude law enforcement officials, firefighters and emergency medical technicians, so long as same are covered by state law addressing this subject; see O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-24, 16-10-24.1 and 16-10-24.2), when such official, employee or agent has been properly identified or is identifiable as such and is engaged in the lawful performance of official duties. 
(b)	Threats or abusive language prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally, by telephone or by other means of communication, any threats, opprobrious words, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to any official, employee or agent of the county charged with enforcing the laws or ordinances of the county with the intent of harassing, preventing or obstructing such official, agent or employee in the enforcement of such laws or ordinances. 
(c)	Threats to family members prohibited. No person shall communicate, personally, by telephone, or by other means of communication, any threats of violence, opprobrious words, abusive language or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to the spouse or children or family of any official, agent or employee of the county with the intent to thereby obstruct, hinder and prevent such official, employee or agent from enforcing the laws or ordinances of the county. 
(d)	Discharge of duties by officials, agents or employees. This section shall in no way free such officers, agents or employees of the county from penalties imposed by laws or ordinances of the county, or regulations of any board thereof, for failure to discharge their official duties. 
(e)	Giving false identification. No person shall give a false name, address, date of birth, or any other information, to any county official, employee or agent in the lawful discharge of official duties with the intent to mislead such official, employee or agent in any way. 
(Code 2005, § 50-74; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 4) 
Sec. 26-57. - Adult bookstores and movie houses. 
(a)	Zoning restrictions. No adult bookstore or adult movie house, as defined in this section, shall be permitted except in an area zoned for such purposes, subject to the restrictions imposed by this section. 
(b)	Distance restrictions. Each adult bookstore and adult movie house is prohibited from operating within 200 yards of any church, church bookstore, public park, public housing project, hospital, school (public or private), college, recreation center or private residence, herein known as the "enumerated uses." 
(c)	Measurement. Distances shall be measured in a straight line from the property line nearest to the enumerated uses of the tax map lot where such adult bookstore or adult movie house is located to the nearest property line where such an enumerated use is located. 
(d)	Definitions. The terms "adult bookstore," "adult movie house," "sexual conduct" and "nudity" are defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, which is incorporated in this section and made a part hereof by reference. 
(e)	Restrictions on occupation tax registration. No occupation tax registration shall be made for purposes in conflict with this section, nor shall any building permit be issued in violation hereof. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 5) 
Sec. 26-58. - Disturbing cemeteries. 
No person shall disturb any grave or injure, mutilate, deface or remove any tomb, monument, shrubbery, railing, or other ornamental improvement within any cemetery in the county which has been or may be established, nor the fencing or enclosure of either, or use any of such cemeteries or burial grounds as a sink, privy or similar convenience. 
(Code 2005, § 50-76; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 26-59. - Bullet and knife wound reports. 
All physicians in the county are required to report to the sheriff's department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from the result of a bullet wound or knife wound. Such report may be made in writing, by telephone or in person, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the sheriff's department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician. 
(Code 2005, § 50-77; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 7) 
Sec. 26-60. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)	Public school grounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or carry any alcoholic beverages, as defined in state law, onto any property of any public school operated by the county board of education or possess such on such school property, unless used by a teacher for educational purposes or if used in a religious ceremony or observance. Any such prohibited items shall be confiscated and upon completion of its use as evidence, destroyed. 
(b)	Intoxicated persons. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, given or in any way furnished to any person in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(c)	Possession by minors. Except as otherwise authorized by state law: 
(1)	No person knowingly, directly or through any other person shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)	No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)	No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or 
(5)	No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)	Furnishing alcohol to inmates. No person, knowingly or intentionally, shall offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide, or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional institution, or other lawful place or confinement. 
(Code 2005, § 50-78; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 8) 
Sec. 26-61. - Theft and diversion of county and public utility services. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the county or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, herein known as "utility services." 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the county or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of utility services, or to intentionally divert any of the services of the county or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without consent of the county or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the county or such company. 
(c)	No person shall knowingly receive the benefits of acts of diversion or of tampering with utility services without the proper charge. 
(d)	Proof that any of the acts specified in this section were done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Code 2005, § 50-79; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 9) 
Sec. 26-62. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)	A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when that person is in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity or under circumstances which cause a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern that such person is involved in unlawful activity. 
(b)	The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm or concern is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Taking flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; 
(2)	Refusing to identify oneself; or 
(3)	Manifestly endeavoring to conceal oneself or any object. 
Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by allowing the person to produce satisfactory identification and an explanation of that person's presence and conduct. 
(Code 2005, § 50-80; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 10) 
Sec. 26-63. - Noises and disturbances. 
(a)	Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas, and further including, without limitation, the following specifically prohibited conduct: 
(1)	The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including music, in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet from the building, structure or vehicle or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; 
(2)	The using, operating or permitting to be used, operated or played of any machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including music, which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle; or 
(3)	Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing, or other similar noisemaking on the public streets, or private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity. 
(b)	Outdoor entertainment events. Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events not being conducted under the direction and control of public or private school or of a governmental entity that have commercial entertainment or electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be 72 hours prior to the event and must be by the person responsible for the event. Registration is to be with the county sheriff's department, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on an application specified by the sheriff and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. 
(Code 2005, § 50-81; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 11) 
Sec. 26-64. - Parties to a crime. 
(a)	With regard to the offenses set forth in this article, every person concerned in the commission of a crime is a party thereto and may be charged with and convicted of commission of the crime. 
(b)	A person is concerned in the commission of a crime if such person: 
(1)	Directly commits the crime; 
(2)	Intentionally causes some other person to commit the crime under such circumstances that the other person is not guilty of any crime either in fact or because of legal incapacity; 
(3)	Intentionally aids or abets in the commission of the crime; or 
(4)	Intentionally advises, encourages, hires, counsels or procures another to commit the crime. 
(Code 2005, § 50-82; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 12) 
Sec. 26-65. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each violation of a section or subsection of this article shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Code 2005, § 50-83; Ord. of 3-3-2003, § 13) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR BEAR CREEK RESERVOIR 

Sec. 28-31. - Hours of operation. 
(a)	The Bear Creek Reservoir is open for public access according to the following schedule: 

 
(b)	The county is authorized to operate the boat ramp facilities and adjacent areas during said hours and dates of operation and on other dates but within normal hours of operation, as determined by the county in its sole discretion, for special events and holidays. 
(c)	The county shall report to the Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority (referred to in this article as the authority) on an annual basis its operating schedule, including special events. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any persons other than authorized employees of the authority and the county while on active duty to be present on the Bear Creek Reservoir property at any time Bear Creek Reservoir is not open for public access with the exception of adjacent property owners who have purchased a yearly pass for their boat from the authority or its representative. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 28-32. - Entrance fees and permits. 
(a)	The entrance fee shall be reviewed and adopted annually by the authority. Said entrance fee may be changed if deemed appropriate without notice by the authority. It shall be unlawful to enter the Bear Creek Reservoir without first securing the appropriate permit. 
(b)	Persons who are bank fishing from permitted areas of the Bear Creek Reservoir shall not be required to pay any entrance fee. 
(c)	All persons under the age of 16 years must be accompanied by an adult at all times while on the Bear Creek Reservoir property. 
(d)	Only those persons who have paid the appropriate entrance fees and obtained the proper permits shall be allowed to access the Bear Creek Reservoir facilities. General public access may be made only thought the entrance gates adjacent to State Route 330. The authority has the discretion to limit the total number of boats on the Bear Creek Reservoir waters during any period of time. Persons other than adjacent landowners shall check in at the designated site location and present proper identification in the form of a driver's license or other government-issued identification that contains a description of the person, a photograph of the person, and the person's date of birth. Upon checking in, a person shall receive a permit which must be maintained in the person's possession at all times while the person is on the authority's property. Persons using the Bear Creek Reservoir facilities shall maintain proper identification in their possession at all times while on the authority's property and shall present their identification and permit upon request from any personnel of the authority or the department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 2) 
Sec. 28-33. - Licenses. 
All persons using the Bear Creek Reservoir facilities shall comply with all the fishing and boating licensing requirements of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 3) 
Sec. 28-34. - Boat permits for adjacent landowners. 
Adjacent landowners owning property contiguous to Bear Creek Reservoir may obtain a permit from the authority upon the payment of the fee currently charged by the authority. The fee for the boat permit shall be reviewed and adopted annually by the authority. The fee may be changed by the authority without notice. All permits issued by the authority are nontransferable. All permits issued by the authority shall expire by their own terms at the end of the calendar year in which they are issued. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 4) 
Sec. 28-35. - Littering. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any discarded or abandoned refuse, rubbish, junk, or other waste material or dead animals. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause to permit the dumping, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any portion of the Bear Creek Reservoir. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 5) 
Sec. 28-36. - Abandoned property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any personal property (including, but not limited to, vehicles) on the authority's property. Any personal property left on the authority's property for a period of 24 hours or more, or at any time after a posted closure hour in a public use area of the authority's property, shall be presumed to be abandoned. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 6) 
Sec. 28-37. - Pollutants and other waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or place any sewage, galley waste, garbage, refuse, and/or pollutants into the Bear Creek Reservoir waters and/or on the authority's property from any vessel or watercraft. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 7) 
Sec. 28-38. - Defacement and destruction of property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage, or destroy any property owned by the authority. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 8) 
Sec. 28-39. - Parking. 
(a)	Persons using the Bear Creek Reservoir facilities may park vehicles only in designated parking areas. Vehicles parked in areas other than designated parking areas shall be towed at the vehicle owner's expense. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the authority's property unless said vehicle has been authorized to park in areas designated for recreation. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 9) 
Sec. 28-40. - Operation of vehicles. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in an area other than the authorized roadways. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in a manner contrary to posted regulations and applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 10) 
Sec. 28-41. - Boating. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to operate a boat with a gasoline engine on Bear Creek Reservoir. It shall be unlawful to operate a boat greater than 20 feet in length on Bear Creek Reservoir. 
(b)	All boat operators shall comply with all rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources regarding boat registration and display of validation decals. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any boat operator to travel within 50 feet of the authority's water intake tower. It shall be unlawful for any boat operator to enter any restricted or prohibited areas of Bear Creek Reservoir. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vessel for a fee or profit on the Bear Creek Reservoir waters and/or the authority's property. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vessel in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner or in any manner that endangers any person (including the operator and occupants of the vessel) or property. 
(f)	All vessels while in use on the Bear Creek Reservoir waters shall have all safety equipment, including without limitation personal flotation devices, on board in compliance with U.S. Coast Guard boating safety requirements and in compliance with boating safety laws issued and enforced by the state. The failure of any person operating a vessel on the Bear Creek Reservoir waters to comply with the above requirements shall be a violation of this article. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use any vessel on Bear Creek Reservoir waters for overnight occupancy or as a place of habitation or residence. 
(h)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use water skis, parasails, ski kites, or any similar devices while on the authority's property. 
(i)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place any vessel on the authority's property unless said vessel is either in actual operation or is moored or stored in an area designated and approved by the authority. 
(j)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place any floating or stationary mooring facilities on, adjacent to, or interfering with a buoy, channel marker, or other navigational aid. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 11) 
Sec. 28-42. - Aircraft. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any aircraft on the authority's property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 12) 
Sec. 28-43. - Swimming. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, dive, snorkel, or scuba dive in Bear Creek Reservoir. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 13) 
Sec. 28-44. - Fishing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in bank fishing from the boat ramps located on the authority's property or from any area other than areas designated for bank fishing by the authority. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 14) 
Sec. 28-45. - Camping and picnicking. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or engage in any camping activities unless it is done in an area specifically designated for camping by the authority. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to picnic or engage in any related day-use activity in any area other than areas specifically designated for such activities by the authority. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 15) 
Sec. 28-46. - Fires. 
(a)	All fires shall be confined to those areas specifically designated by the authority, and shall at all times be contained in fireplaces, grills, or other similar facilities designated for this purpose. Fires shall not be left unattended and shall be extinguished completely prior to the departure from the authority's property of the person making or utilizing the fire. Any violation of this subsection shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any material that produces toxic fumes when burned, including, but not limited to, tires, plastic, and treated wood products. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any lighted smoking materials, matches, or other burning material in an improper manner. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 16) 
Sec. 28-47. - Hunting and trapping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or trap game on the property of the authority unless that person has been issued an emergency permit to hunt or trap game in order to control overpopulation. All federal, state, and local laws and ordinances governing hunting and trapping game shall apply to the authority's property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 17) 
Sec. 28-48. - Containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a glass or Styrofoam container on the Bear Creek Reservoir property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 18) 
Sec. 28-49. - Excessive noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person on the authority's property to make or cause to be made any noise which unreasonably disturbs other persons. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 19) 
Sec. 28-50. - Animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal (with the exception of any service animal) on the Bear Creek Reservoir property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 20) 
Sec. 28-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-002, § 1, adopted May 19, 2014, repealed § 28-51 which pertained to firearms and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 3, 2009, art. 1, § 21. 
Sec. 28-52. - Drugs and alcohol. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcohol, drugs, or any controlled substance (except for a legally prescribed drug) on the Bear Creek Reservoir property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 22) 
Sec. 28-53. - Release of plants and animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to release any amphibians, reptiles, or plants on the Bear Creek Reservoir property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 23) 
Sec. 28-54. - Use of authority property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or gather any trees or parts or trees or to remove any wood from the authority's property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to gather any dead wood on the authority's property for use as firewood. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to pump or remove any water from the Bear Creek Reservoir. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use the authority's property and/or the Bear Creek Reservoir waters for agricultural purposes unless such use is pursuant to and in compliance with the terms and conditions of a lease, license, or other written agreement signed by the authority. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 24) 
Sec. 28-55. - Use of authority property for special events. 
The use of the authority's property for any special events shall be arranged through the county parks and recreation department in compliance with the reservoir management plan. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 25) 
Sec. 28-56. - Occupation of authority property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the land, buildings, vessels, or other facilities located on the authority's property as a fulltime or parttime residence. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 26) 
Sec. 28-57. - Structures and improvements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, place, or cause to exist any structure or improvement (including, but not limited to, roads, trails, docks, signs, and landscape features) of any kind under, upon, in, or over the authority's property unless such structure or improvement has been authorized by a permit, lease, license, or other written agreement that has been issued by or executed by the authority and such structure or improvement complies with the terms and conditions of such permit, lease, license, or written agreement. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 27) 
Sec. 28-58. - Advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, distribute, or utilize any billboards, signs, markers, audio devices (other than personal audio devices used with headphones and at a reasonable volume), handbills, circulars, posters, or any other advertisement without the prior written permission of the reservoir manager. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 28) 
Sec. 28-59. - Commercial activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any commercial activity on the authority's property. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 29) 
Sec. 28-60. - Interference with county or authority employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to forcibly assault, resist, oppose, impede, intimidate, or interfere with any county official, agent, or employee of the authority engaged in the lawful performance of his official duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a lawful order issued by a county official or an employee of the authority who is engaged in the lawful performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 1, § 30) 
Sec. 28-61. - Penalty. 
(a)	The rules and regulations of the Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority, as such exist from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference and made a hereof. A violation of the rules and regulations of the Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority, as such exist from time to time, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(b)	Prosecutions for violations of this article shall be commenced by the completion, signing and service of a citation by any agent of the county who is authorized by the board of commissioners, from time to time, to issue citations or by any agent of the Upper Oconee Basin Water Authority who is authorized by the authority, from time to time, to issue citations. 
(c)	Any person violating any provisions of this article, as such exists from time to time, shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the county, and upon conviction of such violation shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and subject to imprisonment for no more than 60 days or both, except as otherwise provided by general law, or by subsequent amendment of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60. O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. shall govern the trial of any violation of this article, and any violation of this article may be tried upon citation as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2009, art. 2, §§ 1—3) 
Chapter 30 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAULING AND LOGGING OPERATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Sec. 30-19. - Scope. 
This article shall cover any person that uses a county right-of-way in carrying out its business by loading, transporting, or unloading materials of any nature whether on the road surface or a county right-of-way or crossing the unpaved portion of the right-of-way including ditches or embankments. 
(Code 2005, § 62-31; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 30-20. - Exemptions. 
Small and limited operations of less than three tons in load less than 48 hours in duration and using existing driveways may be exempted from the bonding requirements of this article within the reasonable discretion of the code compliance officer. 
(Code 2005, § 62-32; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 8) 
Sec. 30-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access site means any temporary roadway, drive, structure, fill or device, existing or constructed, that is used or employed for the purpose of crossing, travel upon or use of county road rights-of-way. 
County right-of-way means the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, and back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road as defined in this section. 
County road means any county-owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Heavy equipment machinery and vehicles means all devices in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn including, but not limited to, semitrailers, trailers, tractors and truck-tractors, provided, however, that vehicles in use immediately for the control of extinguishing of wild fires shall be exempt from this article. 
Loading and unloading shall be defined by its everyday meaning but also shall include any activity known as harvesting or mining of any product or material. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this article, including the loading or transporting of raw materials such as stone, timber, pulpwood, fill dirt, sand, rock, all minerals and construction material. 
Operator means any person carrying out the activities contemplated by this article. 
(Code 2005, § 62-33; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 30-22. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to fine and/or injunctive relief or any other legal procedure authorized by law. Any fine imposed shall not exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 2005, § 62-34; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 10) 
Sec. 30-23. - Permit required. 
(a)	No person, referred to in this section as harvester, involved in loading and hauling stone, pulpwood, fill dirt, sand, rock, all minerals and construction material or logging and timber operations shall use an existing driveway or access point nor shall install any new driveway, temporary driveway, or means of ingress and egress to any property abutting a county road or county maintained road, without first making application to the board of commissioners through its code compliance officer for and receiving of a permit authorizing such installation or use. 
(b)	Persons constructing, reconstructing or improving any commercial driveway, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-130, are required to obtain a permit from the state department of transportation prior to undertaking such work. (See O.C.G.A. § 32-6-131.) 
(c)	The information required for permits shall consist of the following: 
(1)	The name, address and phone number of the party which will be loading or unloading; 
(2)	The approximate location of access sites to the county road; 
(3)	The date work will commence; 
(4)	Name of the title owner of the tract; 
(5)	Upon completion of the operations, the operator shall give written or oral notification to the code compliance officer for the board of commissioners. 
The site shall be inspected by a county official from the code compliance officer's office or road department, and the code compliance officer shall provide notice of release of liability to the operator within ten days of notification of completion. 
(Code 2005, § 62-35; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 4) 
Sec. 30-24. - Bond. 
(a)	Bond required. An applicant for a permit under this article, unless otherwise exempted in this article, shall file a bond in the amount of $1,000.00 with the application, either in cash, cashier's check or certified check. The bond shall be conditioned to protect and save harmless the board of commissioners from all claims and damages for clearing and repairing any county road. A bond will be required for each separate operation. 
(b)	Multiple operations. An existing bond may be used by an applicant for more than one operation provided there are no violations for any of the operations and provided further that no more than three operations shall be covered by the same bond. Any operation lasting longer or expected to last longer than 30 days shall be subject to a separate bond. 
(c)	Release of bond. Upon completion of the operations and inspection by the code compliance officer, at the request of the applicant, the bond shall be returned to the applicant subject to deductions for repairs that are reasonably required under this article. 
(d)	Denial of permit due to failure to satisfy requirements. No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or has not satisfactorily completed repairs and cleanup from any previously approved site for such applicant's agents. 
(Code 2005, § 62-36; Ord. of 8-19-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 30-25. - Display of permit. 
It shall be the duty of any permittee under this article to post the permit issued to the applicant in a conspicuous place at the work site. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit a permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of the expiration of the permit. 
(Code 2005, § 62-37; Ord. of 8-19-2003, § 7) 
Sec. 30-26. - Harvesting, mining, or loading materials. 
(a)	Loading sites. All harvesting, grading or loading shall be conducted at a loading site off of county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
(b)	Ditches. Ditches within 50 feet of a temporary driveway or right-of-way crossing shall be kept clear of all debris or residue at all times to allow for proper drainage. Culverts shall be installed at temporary entrances, as needed, to facilitate proper drainage flow. The code compliance officer for the county board of commissioners shall notify the operator of the requirement for a culvert based on good engineering and driveway maintenance practices. 
(c)	Warning signs. Any person operating on county rights-of-way shall be required to post warning signs at least 500 feet on both sides of a temporary driveway adequately warning oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering the roadway. 
(d)	Roadway. County roads shall be kept serviceable and open at all times for school business, emergency vehicles, mail carriers and traffic of the general public. 
(e)	Adjacent properties. The operations will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress and egress from the affective and adjacent properties. 
(f)	Supervision and inspection. All work for which a permit is required under this article shall be subject to inspection and supervision by the code compliance officer, after consultation with the road superintendent. The code compliance officer shall have the authority to order the applicant to cease all hauling and logging operations immediately when the weather conditions compromise public safety or public property or when operations are in violation of the standards of this article. 
(g)	Gravel and approaches. The code compliance officer may require the placement of gravel or prepare approaches to the county road of right-of-way when the duration of the operations or weather conditions require it. 
(Code 2005, § 62-38; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 5) 
Sec. 30-27. - Liability for damages and arbitration. 
(a)	Liability. Any provisions of this article notwithstanding, an applicant or operator shall be liable to the county for the full amount of any damages caused by such operations, the amount of bond notwithstanding. 
(b)	Arbitration. If the parties cannot agree on the amount of damages, then the applicant shall have the right to request arbitration in writing. The county shall choose one arbitrator and the operator shall choose the second, both of whom shall be residents of the county. Together, the two designees shall choose a third arbitrator who shall be a registered forester residing in the county or a county contiguous thereto. Within 30 days of their designation, such arbitration panel shall review the damages and render a decision which shall be subject to appeal to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 62-39; Ord. of 8-19-1993, § 9) 
Secs. 30-28—30-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PICKETING AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

Sec. 30-58. - Purposes. 
The board of commissioners adopts this article in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public safety and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 62-71; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. I) 
Sec. 30-59. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in the county magistrate court, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 62-73; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. XIV) 
Sec. 30-60. - Duty to disperse as directed by law enforcement. 
Whenever the free passage of any street, road or sidewalk in the county shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to disperse or move on when so directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 2005, § 62-74; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. XI) 
Sec. 30-61. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating and permit. 
The board of commissioners and the sheriff of the county shall be given at least 18 hours' written notice of any person planning to picket or demonstrate. Notice shall be given on a form approved by the board of commissioners and the sheriff. Upon submission of a completed form and its transmittal to the sheriff, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall issue a written permit stating the name of the person planning to picket, the name of the place of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours the picketing or demonstrations will be conducted. 
(Code 2005, § 62-75; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. X) 
Sec. 30-62. - Prohibited in certain places. 
There shall be no picketing or demonstrating in front of any building in which the following are located, affecting the normal operations thereof: 
(1)	A hospital, nursing home or rest home, within 200 feet of the boundary line; 
(2)	A school, within 100 feet; 
(3)	A residence, no longer than 45 minutes; 
(4)	A state or federal highway or road unless there has been compliance with all rules, regulations, and requirements imposed by the appropriate state or federal governing authority for the use of the state or federal highway or road as a private route. 
(Code 2005, § 62-76; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. VIII) 
Sec. 30-63. - Participation by persons under 16 years of age prohibited. 
No person under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to absent themselves from school attendance in order to march, picket, or demonstrate within the county during any time that such person is required by law to be in attendance at school, unless such person has obtained written permission from the appropriate educational authority to be absent from school to attend and to participate in such march, picket, or demonstration. 
(Code 2005, § 62-77; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. IX) 
Sec. 30-64. - Use of vehicles. 
No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating line, and all pickets or demonstrators shall be afoot. 
(Code 2005, § 62-78; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. XII) 
Sec. 30-65. - Use of sidewalks, streets and roads. 
(a)	When picketing or a demonstration is conducted on public sidewalks maintained by the county, only the outside five feet of the sidewalk next to the curb shall be used by the pickets or demonstrators. No picketing or demonstrating shall be conducted on the remaining portion of the sidewalks or on that portion of the streets or roads used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(b)	When picketing or a demonstration is conducted on paved public streets or roads maintained by the county, the pickets or demonstrators shall not stand, march, or sit within eight feet of the edge of the pavement. When picketing or a demonstration is conducted on unpaved public streets or roads maintained by the county, the pickets or demonstrators shall not stand, march, or sit within ten feet of the edge of the road. 
(Code 2005, § 62-79; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. V) 
Sec. 30-66. - Assemblages to be peaceful, orderly and unattended by noise. 
All assemblies and picketing shall be orderly, taking into consideration the rights of any residents in the immediate area of the demonstration or picketing to the peaceable enjoyment of their residences. To the extent that any residence is located within 300 feet of the location of any demonstration/picketing, the demonstrators or picketers shall not use any sound amplification system, except for one handheld bullhorn; provided, however that no handheld bullhorn may be used in any such demonstration or picketing between sundown and sunrise. 
(Code 2005, § 62-80; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. IV) 
Sec. 30-67. - Time of picketing and public demonstrations. 
Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only between sunrise and sunset. 
(Code 2005, § 62-81; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. XIII) 
Sec. 30-68. - Limitations on picketers or demonstrators before place of business or facility. 
Marching by picketers or demonstrators shall be spaced at a distance of five feet, front to back, and five feet, side to side and shall not otherwise block access. 
(Code 2005, § 62-82; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. VI) 
Sec. 30-69. - Use of placards and signs. 
Pickets or demonstrators shall carry only cardboard or paper placards or signs and the words used thereon shall not be such that they would immediately incite violence. No metal or wood may be attached to the placards or signs and the placards or signs shall not be more than 36 inches in length and not more than 36 inches in width. 
(Code 2005, § 62-83; Ord. of 7-11-2000(1), art. VII) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multi-jurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Any ordinances adopting a comprehensive solid waste management plan (as approved in November 2004 and kept by the clerk) and shortterm work update are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-21. - Purposes. 
The board of commissioners, a political subdivision of the state, hereby enacts this article in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of the county, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment, to institute and maintain countywide rules and regulations controlling the spread of refuse and to establish rules and regulations concerning refuse and solid waste management to assure that refuse and solid waste systems, whether privately or publicly operated, do not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and do not unduly degrade the quality of the environment. 
(Code 2005, § 66-31; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), art. I) 
Sec. 32-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Asbestos means any naturally occurring hydrated mineral silicates separable into commercially used fibers, specifically the asbestiform varieties of serpentine, chrysatile cummingtomite-grunerite, amosite, rieheckite, crocidolite, anthophyllite, tremolite, and actinolite. 
Baling means a volume reduction technique whereby solid waste is compressed into bales. 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alterations of existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing buildings. 
Collector means the person as defined in this section who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid wastes, from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting wastes from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid waste. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, asphalt, wall board, paper or cardboard. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal which includes administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuff resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Garbage bag means a plastic, or other similar nonporous material, bag or sack designed specifically to contain garbage or household trash in a secure airtight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Inert waste landfill means a disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to dirt and dirt-like products, concrete, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste. 
Infectious waste means all biomedical waste as defined in section 32-93. 
Junk vehicle includes any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or mechanical contrivance or part thereof, which is in an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, inoperative, and which does not have a valid license plate; or which has been abandoned or discarded according to the definition of "abandoned motor vehicle" set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. For the purposes of this article, a vehicle is inoperative if it is incapable of movement by its own power, or it remains in place for a period of more than seven days, and in neither case is within a carport or parking way or driveway. 
Junkyard includes land on which two or more junk vehicles are parked, standing, or allowed to remain. 
Landfill means any facility where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or depositing of solid waste occurs. 
Leachate means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a sanitary landfill for collecting the leachate which may percolate through the wastes and into the soil surrounding the landfill. 
Liner means a continuous layer of natural or manmade materials, beneath or on the sides of a disposal site or disposal site cell which restricts the downward or lateral escape of solid waste, solid waste constituents, or leachate. 
Monofill means a method of solid waste handling that involves the burial of one waste type or wastes having very similar characteristics in a segregated trench or area which is physically separated from dissimilar or incompatible waste. 
Nuisance means anything which meets that definition of the term as defined by O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 and which occurs during or as the result of the handling or disposing of solid waste. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Operator means the person having direct supervision of daily field operation of a disposal site to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the county or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in the county. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in the county, or any other county. 
Processing operation means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form of chemical content of solid waste and includes all aspects of its management, administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements. 
Public or private property means: 
(1)	The right-of-way of any road, street or highway; 
(2)	Any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; 
(3)	Any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and 
(4)	Residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
(1)	Kitchen wastes; 
(2)	Animal manure; 
(3)	Offal; 
(4)	Hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes; and 
(5)	Garbage. 
Pyrolysis means the chemical decomposition of a material by heat in the absence of oxygen. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid wastes for future use in accordance with procedure approved by the office of the board of commissioners. 
Recycling means any process by which reclaimed materials or other materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw material or products. 
Refuse means all asbestos, biomedical waste, construction/demolition waste, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, industrial waste, infectious waste, junk vehicles, litter, putrescible wastes, rubbish, slag or solid waste, as defined in this section, or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
Road and street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish includes wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material, and similar material. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon. 
Sanitary landfilling means an engineered method of disposing of putrescible solid waste on land by spreading them in thin layers, compacting them to the smallest practical volume, placing an earth cover thereon and such other measures as are necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
Scavenge and scavenging mean any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Shredding means the process by which solid waste is cut or torn into small pieces for final disposal or further processing. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste and materials destined for recycling, and shall include the following: 
(1)	Garbage; 
(2)	Rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, aluminum cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage): 
a.	Ashes; 
b.	Plastic bottles; 
c.	Nails; 
d.	Tacks; 
e.	Wire; 
f.	Metal bottle caps; 
g.	Plastic bottle caps; 
h.	Street refuse; 
i.	Dead animals; 
j.	Sewage sludges; 
k.	Animal manures; 
l.	Industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations); 
m.	Residue from incineration; 
n.	Food processing wastes; 
o.	Demolition wastes; 
p.	Abandoned automobiles; 
q.	Dredging wastes; 
r.	Construction wastes; and 
s.	Any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this article. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Solid waste handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof occurs. 
Solid waste handling permit means written authorization granted to a person by the office of the board of commissioners to engage in solid waste handling. 
Solid waste management act and Act wherever referred to in this article, means O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20. 
Special solid waste means any solid waste not otherwise regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., and regulations promulgated thereunder or originating or produced from or by a source or generator not subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-27(g). 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal site or processing operation. 
Uppermost aquifer means the geologic formation nearest the natural ground surface that is an aquifer, as well as lower aquifers that are hydraulically interconnected with this aquifer within the solid waste handling facility's property boundary. 
(Code 2005, § 66-33; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 4.1) 
Sec. 32-23. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)	Any peace officer of the state or the county or county marshal or any employee of the county appointed by the board of commissioners by appropriate resolution to serve as its designee shall be authorized to oversee all matters concerning the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	Any peace officer of the state or the county or county marshal or any employee of the county appointed by the board of commissioners as its designee shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this article or to the owner or other person who may be in possession of any property upon which any condition exists which constitutes a violation of any provision of this article. Such citations shall be on a form approved by the board of commissioners and shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the representative of the county who completes and serves it. 
(Code 2005, § 66-34; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 9.0) 
Sec. 32-24. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Investigation on private property. Upon discovery of any refuse on private property, or upon being informed of the existence of such items on private property, any county or municipal law enforcement officer, including the county marshal, shall be authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of investigating the alleged refuse on the private property in violation of this article. 
(b)	Presumptions. 
(1)	Whenever any item of refuse as defined in this article is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)	Whenever any item of refuse as defined in this article is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article and is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)	Court proceedings. 
(1)	Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations or accusations as described in section 32-23(b) and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney or another attorney designated by the board of commissioners shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(2)	Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
(3)	Nothing in section 32-23 and this section shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed in this article shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy by law. 
(4)	Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)	Penalty. 
(1)	Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
a.	As provided in section 1-12; 
b.	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one-mile, any refuse deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of sentence; or 
c.	In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited refuse, any and all refuse deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(2)	Records of convictions for violation of this article shall be a matter of public record. 
(3)	No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate judge and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(Code 2005, § 66-35; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), §§ 9.1—9.4) 
Secs. 32-25—32-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REFUSE CONTROL; CLASSIFICATION FOR DISPOSAL 

Sec. 32-52. - Criteria for disposing of refuse. 
(a)	Limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of refuse on any road or street or any public or private property in the county, unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or the county or by any of their agencies for the disposal of refuse and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; or 
(2)	The refuse is placed into a refuse receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of refuse. 
(b)	Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse or household trash in any street, median strip, alley or other place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over, or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(d)	Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the chairperson of the board of commissioners or his designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(e)	Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliances, refrigerators or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(f)	Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any road or street to transport such material without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle, provided that the transported materials present a danger of falling from the vehicle. This section shall apply to the transportation of any garbage, refuse, household trash or other material of any kind to any disposal site, which include, but are not limited to, any dumpster or sanitary landfill. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage, or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(g)	Used tires. No person shall accumulate used vehicle tires in such a manner as to pose a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. Tires will only be placed in the county landfill at designated locations. 
(Code 2005, § 66-51; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 5.0) 
Sec. 32-53. - Scavenging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge, disturb, or in any way interfere with the contents of any public landfill or public waste disposal area. 
(Code 2005, § 66-52; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 32-54. - Private refuse control. 
(a)	Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional, or industrial building or property shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to provide refuse containers of that character, size, number and type as may be required to hold refuse generated by operations on the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirement for those containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and similar establishments; and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, colleges, and churches or property thereof. 
(b)	Every owner and every operator of a private or commercial parking lot shall provide refuse containers of adequate size, character and number as specified by the board of commissioners, or its designee, or contain the refuse generated by the operations of that parking lot. 
(c)	Property owners and prime contractors in charge of a construction site shall be jointly and severally required to furnish refuse containers for discarded building materials and other construction refuse. Construction site operators are required to control refuse and solid waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. All refuse from construction and related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each work day. 
(d)	The owner, occupant, and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all refuse and place the same in proper containers, and vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls and sidewalks shall be kept free of refuse by those persons. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all other commercial and industrial enterprises shall see to it that their respective properties are kept refuse free. 
(Code 2005, § 66-53; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 5.2; Ord. No. 15-004, 4-6-2015 ) 
Sec. 32-55. - Domestic refuse. 
The following types of refuse shall be classed as domestic refuse and shall be accepted for disposal: 
(1)	Garbage. 
(2)	Business trash. 
(3)	Refuse. 
(4)	Household trash. 
(Code 2005, § 66-54; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 7.0) 
Sec. 32-56. - Industrial waste. 
The following types of waste shall be classified as industrial waste and shall not be accepted for disposal: 
(1)	Industrial waste. 
(2)	Hazardous refuse. 
(Code 2005, § 66-55; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 7.1) 
Sec. 32-57. - Building materials. 
Building materials, if presented to the county for disposal, may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners or its designee and specific locations within the landfill may be designated for the disposal of building materials. 
(Code 2005, § 66-56; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 7.2) 
Secs. 32-58—32-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION; HANDLING; DISPOSAL; LANDFILLS 

Sec. 32-88. - Garbage and wastes; applicability; prohibitions; recycling. 
(a)	Manner of handling waste. No person shall engage in solid waste handling or transportation of garbage in a manner which will likely create a nuisance or litter the land, roads or streets of the county; be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety or well-being as may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Applicability. Provisions of this division shall apply to all persons presently engaged in refuse/solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in refuse/solid waste handling. 
(c)	Prohibited acts. 
(1)	Burning. No refuse/solid waste may be burned at a solid waste handling facility, disposal site or processing operation except by an incineration method such as an air curtain destructor or other methods approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Open dump. No refuse/solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property. 
(d)	Prohibited wastes. If, because of unusual physical or chemical properties, or geological or hydrological conditions, or for other reasons, the board of commissioners finds that solid waste should not be accepted at a solid waste handling facility, the board of commissioners may require that such waste be prohibited, and that a proposal for disposal of such waste, with supporting data as may be deemed necessary, be submitted by the originator of such waste for consideration of approval by the board of commissioners, and the prohibition of such waste shall continue in effect until an acceptable procedure for processing or disposal has been developed and approved. 
(e)	Materials destined for recycling. 
(1)	Materials which are destined for recycling are excluded from this article as refuse/solid wastes. To be considered exempt from this article, the material must be processed to recover a usable product, employed as an ingredient in an industrial process to make a product, or employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product. 
(2)	Materials accumulated speculatively are refuse/solid waste and must comply with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(3)	A material is not accumulated speculatively if the person accumulating it can show that during the calendar year (commencing on January 1) the amount of material that is recycled equals at least 60 percent by weight or volume of the material accumulated at the beginning of the period. 
(f)	Form of proof of recycling. Proof of recycling shall be provided in the form of manifests, bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material in question to a recognized recycling facility from the accumulation point. 
(Code 2005, § 66-71; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.3) 
Sec. 32-89. - Private collection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the county except from his own residence, business or individual plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and without first having obtained a county permit and business license. 
(Code 2005, § 66-72; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.0) 
Sec. 32-90. - Private landfills. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area intended to be used by the owner or used by others for the disposal or storage of waste without first having filed the proper application for a special use permit and business license with the board of commissioners. The owner of any landfill must also obtain a proper permit from the department of natural resources and must meet all the requirements of the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division, O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4, solid waste management. 
(b)	No permit shall be issued by the county until the applicant has shown, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners or its designee that all federal, state, and county regulations and ordinances will be complied with in the operation and management of the landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area, and that the location of such landfill, waste disposal area, or waste storage area is such that there is no or minimal detriment to the environment, including, but not limited to, noxious odors, runoff, or contamination of surface water and groundwater, so that the maximum protection is afforded to the health, safety and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(c)	It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(d)	The board of commissioners shall designate county employees and its designees shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 66-73; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.1) 
Sec. 32-91. - Public landfills. 
(a)	The county, through the board of commissioners, may operate and maintain public landfills located on county owned or leased property and in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)	Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the county transfer station. 
(c)	Such sites shall be maintained while in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting notices and through public advertisements. 
(d)	The board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type of refuse. 
(e)	Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance men, may use the public designated sites. 
(f)	Residents of the county, other than commercial collectors, may use public sites upon payment of a fee, if any, to be set by the board of commissioners in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(g)	Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Saturday of each week, with the exception of holidays. During the hours designated by the board of commissioners or its designee, acceptable refuse generated in the county shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county. 
(h)	No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days stipulated by the board of commissioners. All materials delivered and deposited in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 66-74; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.2) 
Sec. 32-92. - Permit by rule for collection transportation and disposal. 
(a)	Generally. The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facilities, shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all refuse/solid waste accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution, or similar facility to a refuse/solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with this article unless arrangements have been made for such service with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(b)	Permit by rule. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following collection, transportation, and disposal operations shall be deemed to have a refuse/solid waste handling permit if the conditions listed are met: 
(1)	Notification. Within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of commencing refuse/solid waste handling activities which are covered under a permit by ordinance, notification must be made to the board of commissioners of such activity. Notification shall be made on such forms as are provided by the board of commissioners. Persons failing to notify the board of commissioners of such activities shall be deemed to be operating without a permit. 
(2)	Collection operations. 
a.	Vehicle construction. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible wastes, or rubbish containing such wastes, shall be covered, substantially leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. 
b.	Vehicle maintenance. Refuse/solid waste collection and transportation vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent threats to human health and shall be maintained in good repair. 
c.	Littering and spillage. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom and shall be covered when necessary to prevent blowing or falling of material from the vehicle. 
d.	Hazardous waste. No regulated quantities of hazardous wastes may be collected and transported except in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
e.	Wastewater from cleaning vehicles. All wastewater from cleaning of vehicles must be handled in a manner which meets all applicable environmental laws and regulations. 
f.	Collected refuse; solid waste. All collected refuse/solid waste must be deposited only in a permitted refuse/solid waste handling facility authorized to receive the applicable waste types. 
(3)	Transfer stations. 
a.	Refuse/solid waste shall be confined to the interior of transfer stations, and not allowed to scatter to the outside. Waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, and floors shall be kept clean and well drained. 
b.	Sewage solids shall be excluded from transfer stations and shall be transported directly to the disposal facility, disposal site or processing operation. 
c.	Dust, odors and similar conditions resulting from transfer operations shall be controlled at all times. 
d.	Rodents, insects and other such pests shall be controlled. 
e.	Any contaminated runoff washwater shall be discharged to a wastewater treatment system and, before final release, shall be treated in a manner approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)	Hazardous waste. No person owning or operating a transfer station shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the handling of regulated quantities of hazardous waste. 
(5)	Inert waste landfill operation. 
a.	Only dirt, concrete, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, and land clearing debris such as stumps, limbs and leaves, are acceptable for disposal in an inert waste landfill. No industrial or demolition wastes may be accepted. 
b.	Materials placed in inert waste landfills shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. 
c.	A uniform compacted layer of clean cover no less than one foot in depth shall be placed over all exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
d.	The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
e.	Access to inert waste landfills shall be limited to authorized entrances which shall be closed when the site is not in operation. 
f.	Suitable means shall be provided to prevent and control fires. Stockpiled soil is considered to be the most satisfactory firefighting material. 
g.	A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not later than one month following final placement of inert waste within that lift. 
h.	Notice of final closure must be provided to the board of commissioners within 30 days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste for in excess of 180 days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this article unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
(Code 2005, § 66-75; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.4) 
Sec. 32-93. - Biomedical waste. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means and includes the following: 
(1)	Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(2)	Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings, and other bulk body fluids which cannot or are not directly discarded into a county/municipal sewer system. 
(3)	Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(4)	Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)	Sharps, which means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)	Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant agents). Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The waste set forth in this subsection must first be classified as empty which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)	Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
(b)	Generation of biomedical waste. 
(1)	This article shall apply to all facilities generating regulated quantities of biomedical waste, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Clinics; 
b.	Dental offices; 
c.	Funeral homes; 
d.	Health maintenance organizations (HMOs); 
e.	Hospitals; 
f.	Laboratories; 
g.	Medical buildings; 
h.	Physicians' offices; 
i.	Veterinary offices; 
j.	Research and manufacturing facilities; 
k.	Nursing homes; and 
l.	Blood banks. 
(2)	In no case shall a person be a generator of biomedical waste if those wastes are generated from single-family residential premises or a single-family dwelling unit and disposed of as residential solid wastes. 
(c)	Storage and containment of biomedical waste. 
(1)	Containment of biomedical waste shall be in a manner and location which affords protection from animals, rain and wind, does not provide a breeding place or a food source for insects and rodents, and minimizes exposure to the public. 
(2)	Biomedical waste shall be segregated by separate containment from other waste at the point of origin. 
a.	Biomedical waste, except for sharps, shall be placed in containers which are impervious to moisture and have a strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing, or bursting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling, or transport. 
b.	Sharps shall be contained for storage, transportation, treatment and subsequent disposal in leakproof, rigid, puncture-resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded to preclude loss of contents. 
(3)	Rigid containers of discarded sharps and all other disposable containers used for containment of biomedical waste shall be red or orange in color or clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or clearly marked with the word "biohazard." 
(4)	Biomedical waste contained in disposable containers as prescribed above, shall be placed for storage, handling, or transport in disposable or reusable pails; cartons, boxes, drums, dumpsters, or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tightfitting cover and be kept clean and in good repair. The containers may be of any color and shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the word "biohazards" on the sides so as to be readily visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
a.	Reusable containers used for shipment of biomedical waste to a treatment facility of a permitted sanitary landfill shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated each time they are emptied unless the surfaces of the containers have been protected from contamination by disposable liners, bags, or other devices removed with the waste. 
b.	Reusable pails, drums, dumpsters or bins used for containment of biomedical waste shall not be used for other purposes except after being decontaminated by procedures as described in this subsection and after the universal biohazard symbol and word "biohazard" are removed. 
(d)	Transfer of biomedical waste to off-site treatment or disposal facilities. 
(1)	Any generator or biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector who is operating under authority of this article. 
(2)	Biomedical waste shall not be transported in the same vehicle with other solid waste unless the biomedical waste is contained in a separate, fully enclosed leakproof container within the vehicle compartment or unless all of the waste is to be treated as biomedical waste in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)	Biomedical waste shall be delivered for storage, including intermediate transfer, and treatment only to a facility or location for which there is a valid and appropriate operating permit as set forth in this article. 
(4)	Surfaces of transport vehicles that have contacted spilled or leaked biomedical waste shall be decontaminated. 
(5)	Packaged biomedical waste may not be compacted or shredded prior to delivery to the treatment or disposal facility unless such compaction or shredding is in conjunction with chemical or other treatment which renders the waste noninfectious. 
(e)	Treatment, discharge and disposal of biomedical waster. 
(1)	If treated in accordance with the following procedures, the waste shall no longer be considered biomedical waste and may be combined and handled with regular solid waste. Biomedical waste shall be treated by one of the following methods prior to disposal at a permitted solid waste disposal facility: 
a.	Incineration in an incinerator which provides complete combustion of waste to render it nonpathogenic. 
1.	Biomedical waste incinerators shall be capable of maintaining a minimum temperature in the primary chamber sufficient to destroy infectious agents and produce a residue essentially free of odors and unstable organic matter. If chemotherapy wastes are incinerated, the incinerator must be capable of maintaining a minimum of, 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit in the secondary combustion chamber and a minimum residence time of two seconds. 
2.	Atmospheric emissions shall be controlled so as not exceed air quality standards of the department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
b.	Decontamination by heating with steam under pressure (autoclave) so as to render the biomedical waste noninfectious. 
1.	Recording of the thermometer during each complete cycle shall be used to ensure the attainment of a temperature of 121 degrees Centigrade (250 degrees Fahrenheit) for one-half hour or longer in order to achieve decontamination of the entire load. 
2.	Monitoring of the steam sterilization process shall be required in order to confirm the attainment of decontamination. 
3.	Monitoring may be through the use of biological indicators or other methods as approved by the board of commissioners. 
c.	Other methods as may be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Biomedical waste may be discharged to a sewage treatment system that provides secondary treatment of waste if approved by the agency responsible for the operation of the sewage treatment system. 
(3)	Biomedical wastes consisting of recognizable human anatomical remains shall not be disposed of by sanitary landfilling. 
(4)	Chemotherapy waste, as defined in subsection (a)(6) of this section, shall be treated at a permitted incineration facility or other facility approved by the board of commissioners. Steam decontamination may not be used for treatment of chemotherapy waste. 
(f)	Disposal of biomedical waste. 
(1)	Biomedical wastes treated in accordance with the provisions contained in this section shall be properly disposed of at a facility permitted under the authority of this article unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Until such time as treatment is required, untreated biomedical waste shall be placed in the working face of a permitted sanitary landfill such that the disposal operations do not destroy the integrity of the biomedical waste containers, until sufficient nonbiomedical waste has been placed over the biomedical waste to preclude exposure of site workers to the contents of the containers upon handling and compaction. 
(Code 2005, § 66-76; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.5) 
Sec. 32-94. - Asbestos containing waste. 
(a)	Collection. 
(1)	Vehicles used for the transportation of containerized asbestos waste shall have an enclosed carrying compartment or utilize a covering sufficient to contain the transported waste, prevent damage to containers, and prevent release or spillage for the vehicle. 
(2)	Vehicles used to reduce waste volume by compaction shall not be used because containers may rupture. 
(3)	Vacuum trucks used to transport waste slurry must be constructed and operated to ensure that water does not leak from the truck. 
(b)	Disposal. 
(1)	Asbestos waste is to be disposed of only in a permitted sanitary landfill authorized by the board of commissioners for acceptance of asbestos containing waste. 
(2)	Asbestos waste shall be sealed in leakproof containers labeled with: "Caution—contains asbestos fibers—Avoid opening or breaking container—Breathing asbestos is hazardous to your health." 
(3)	Asbestos waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as not to destroy the integrity of the asbestos containing material containers. This waste shall be covered immediately with other solid waste or soil. 
(4)	Asbestos waste must be completely covered immediately after deposition with a minimum of six inches of nonasbestos material. 
(Code 2005, § 66-77; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.6) 
Sec. 32-95. - Liquid waste restrictions at sanitary landfills. 
The following restrictions apply at sanitary landfills: 
(1)	Liquid waste, either bulk or containerized, shall not be placed in a sanitary landfill except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(2)	If liquid waste is demonstrated nonhazardous and is admixed with bladeable material into a bladeable form, it is acceptable for disposal at a sanitary landfill with concurrence of the sanitary landfill operator. 
(3)	Gas condensate and recirculated leachate disposal at sanitary landfills may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the board of commissioners if sufficient evidence is provided to the board of commissioners to warrant such disposal. 
(Code 2005, § 66-78; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 6.7) 
Secs. 32-96—32-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 32-119. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the county shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to park or let stand any junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle on public property or within 20 feet of a county or state road located within the county. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep any junk vehicle on any property adjoining or abutting any public road, street or other public property within the unincorporated portions of the county, and visible from such public road, street, way or other public property. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to dispose of a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle in or at any sanitary landfill. 
(e)	The enforcement provisions of this article as they apply to junk vehicles are not exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other regulations and regulatory codes of the state or the county. 
(Code 2005, § 66-101; Ord. of 6-13-2000(1), § 8.0) 
Secs. 32-120—32-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOUNTY PAYMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 32-137. - Findings. 
It is hereby found and determined that: 
(1)	Indiscriminate littering and other illegal dumping of solid or liquid waste and hazardous substances is known to be harmful to the environment and a blight to the landscape; 
(2)	The creation of a reward or bounty system will offer an incentive for the general public to report such illegal activity, thereby augmenting the capability of the county to monitor and to prevent indiscriminate littering and other illegal dumping throughout the county; 
(3)	A reward or bounty system has been used by other governmental agencies with favorable results, curbing the amount and type of littering and other illegal dumping; and 
(4)	Generating publicity pertaining to the bounty authorized by this article constitutes a public purpose in that it will increase the public's awareness of the adverse environmental and social effects of littering and other illegal dumping and the judicial consequences that can result therefrom and will thereby reduce littering and other illegal dumping within the county. 
(Code 2005, § 66-121; Ord. of 8-19-1993(1), § 1) 
Sec. 32-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bounty means reward. 
County marshal means the county marshal of the county and/or the designee of such county marshal. 
Successful criminal prosecution means: 
(1)	The conviction; 
(2)	The placing upon probation; 
(3)	The placing within a pretrial intervention program; or 
(4)	Such other similar successful court ordered punishment or remedy imposed upon a person or entity for unlawful littering or dumping within the county. 
Unlawful littering or dumping means any action or activity that violates the county's solid waste management regulations in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 66-122; Ord. of 8-19-1993(1), § 2) 
Sec. 32-139. - Development and implementation of program. 
The county marshal is hereby authorized and directed to develop and implement a bounty payment program for the reporting of unlawful littering or dumping when such reporting results in a successful criminal prosecution against the person or entity reported. 
(Code 2005, § 66-123; Ord. of 8-19-1993(1), § 3) 
Sec. 32-140. - Guidelines. 
The bounty payment program to be developed and implemented by the county marshal shall conform to the following general guidelines: 
(1)	The bounty amount payable shall be $100.00 to $500.00 for each successful criminal prosecution against a person or entity. Separate counts or charges contained within the same governmental prosecuting document shall not be stacked or cumulated to create more than one successful criminal prosecution per prosecuting document. 
(2)	To be eligible for payment of a bounty, the report of the unlawful littering or dumping must be made by the person claiming the bounty to the county staff person authorized by the county marshal to receive the report and the information reported must lead to a successful criminal prosecution of a person or entity for the unlawful littering or dumping reported. 
(3)	The amount of the bounty will be determined based on the seriousness of the reported activity, the duration of the violation, the usefulness of the information reported in obtaining the successful criminal prosecution, and the willingness and ability of the reporting person to participate in the successful criminal prosecution. First in time reports containing the same essential information as subsequent reports shall be deemed the more useful of the reports. The county marshal may require that the bounty for a successful criminal prosecution be equitably divided between one or more persons eligible to receive the bounty. 
(4)	The statute of limitation must not have expired on the alleged unlawful littering or dumping. 
(5)	Although anonymity cannot be guaranteed to a person making a report concerning unlawful littering or dumping, the county marshal shall use his best efforts consistent with the laws of state to protect the confidentiality of the person making the report if such persons making the report requests such confidentiality. 
(6)	Bounties paid pursuant to this article are hereby approved and shall be paid from the county's landfill fund. 
(Code 2005, § 66-124; Ord. of 8-19-1993(1), § 4) 
Sec. 32-141. - Authorization to promote program. 
The county marshal is authorized and directed to promote this article and the county's bounty payment program by utilizing appropriate communication mediums in order to ensure wide dissemination of information pertaining thereto to the public and thereby increase the effectiveness and success of the bounty payment program. Promotional costs incurred pursuant to this section shall not exceed $500.00 per year and shall be paid from the county's landfill fund. 
(Code 2005, § 66-125; Ord. of 8-19-1993(1), § 5) 
Chapter 34 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; special county one percent sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq.; providing funds or extending credit to private persons, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME LOCATION PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; authority of general assembly to classify mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III(b)(2)(B). 

Sec. 34-19. - Location permit; decal. 
(a)	Each year every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation under this article shall obtain on or before April 1 from the tax commissioner of the county a mobile home location permit. The issuance of the permit by the tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, the color of which shall be prescribed for each year by the state tax revenue commissioner. Each decal shall reflect the county as the county of issuance and the calendar year for which the decal is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed on the mobile home by the owner. 
(b)	Each year every owner of a mobile home situated in the county on January 1 which is not subject to taxation under this article shall obtain on or before April 1 from the tax commissioner of the county a mobile home location permit. The issuance of the permit shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal which shall reflect the county as the county of issuance and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed on the mobile home by the owner. 
(Code 2005, § 74-31; Ord. of 9-9-1997, art. 1) 
Sec. 34-20. - Permit display. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to fail to attach and display on a mobile home the decal as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 
(b)	Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the magistrate's court shall be punished as provided in section 1-12, except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of the issuance of a summons, the fine shall be $25.00. 
(Code 2005, § 74-32; Ord. of 9-9-1997, art. 2) 
Sec. 34-21. - Payment of taxes; returns. 
Each year every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation under this article shall return the mobile home for taxation and shall pay the taxes due on the mobile home at the time the owner applies for the mobile home location permit, or at the time of the first sale or transfer of the mobile home after December 31, or on April 1, whichever occurs first. If the owner returns the mobile home for taxation prior to the date that the application for the mobile home location permit is required, the owner shall apply for the permit at the time the mobile home is returned for taxation. Except as provided for mobile homes owned by a dealer, no mobile home location permit shall be issued by the tax commissioner until all ad valorem taxes due on the mobile home have been paid. 
(Code 2005, § 74-33; Ord. of 9-9-1997, art. 3) 
Secs. 34-22—34-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 34-46. - Certain property exempted. 
(a)	The board of commissioners of the county shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, all or any combination of the following types of tangible personal property: 
(1)	Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use of consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this section shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)	Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this section shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)	Inventory of finished goods which, on the first day of January, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this section shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. 
(b)	All property that is claimed to be exempt under this subsection shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the property, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such in transit property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Code 2005, § 74-61) 
Secs. 34-47—34-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 34-66. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 2005, § 74-91) 
Sec. 34-67. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 34-66 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 2005, § 74-92) 
Sec. 34-68. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners of the county on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners of the county shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this resolution based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Code 2005, § 74-93) 
Sec. 34-69. - Due date. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 34-68 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 74-94) 
Secs. 34-70—34-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GROSS DIRECT PREMIUMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 34-97. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2)—(5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 2005, § 74-121) 
Secs. 34-98—34-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-123. - Appropriate governmental services. 
The provisions of this article may be used in the provision of water, sewer, roads, drainage facilities and street lighting. As it is the intent of the board of commissioners that the provisions of this article shall be used to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county, the board may from time to time agree that other governmental services may be established and funded through this mechanism. Any request for such other governmental services must be made to the board prior to the filing of a petition as set out below. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to require the board to approve any such request and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the board to make a determination to establish any such special tax district. 
(Code 2005, § 74-161; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 1) 
Sec. 34-124. - Purpose and construction of article. 
(a)	This article shall be construed together with and subject to the county zoning regulations, the county subdivision regulations, the county water and waste water ordinances and other relevant county ordinances specifying the responsibilities of those entities developing property. 
(b)	This article shall be a supplemental means of providing for the following governmental services: 
(1)	Lighting fixtures for the illumination of public streets, roads, sidewalks and alleyways (hereinafter sometimes referred to collectively as "public rights-of-way"); 
(2)	All public rights-of-way; 
(3)	All water systems within governmental easements or the public rights-of-way; 
(4)	All sewer lines and systems within governmental easements or the public rights-of-way; and 
(5)	All drainage systems within governmental easements or the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2005, § 74-162; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 2(A)) 
Sec. 34-125. - Compliance. 
Such systems must fully comply with applicable federal, state and county rules, regulations and ordinances. Additionally, no persons, firms or entities shall be permitted to establish lighting of public rights-of-way in any portion of the unincorporated area of the county without first complying with the provisions of this article specific to street lighting which are set forth in section 34-132. 
(Code 2005, § 74-163; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 2(B)) 
Sec. 34-126. - Duties of planning director. 
The county planning director, his designee or such other person or department as may be designated by the board of commissioners from time to time (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "planning director") shall be responsible for administering the special tax district program as set forth in this article and shall: 
(1)	Advise prospective petitioners for proposed special tax districts of the procedures required for the establishment of such districts pursuant to this article. 
(2)	Establish the boundaries of proposed special tax districts in accordance with such criteria and in such manner as the planning director may deem necessary and appropriate. 
(3)	Establish an orderly system of numbering special tax districts created pursuant to this article in conjunction with the county tax assessor and the county tax commissioner. 
(4)	Provide standard form petitions for use by prospective petitioners, which shall require, among such other matters as are set out herein and as may be required by the planning director, a professionally prepared estimate of the cost of the project. 
(5)	Advise petition originators of estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within proposed special tax districts. 
(6)	Examine all filed petitions for accuracy and for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(7)	Notify the appropriate county department and the county engineer of the petition and secure their review and approval of the petition. Such review and approval should be based on sound engineering practices and the compatibility of the proposal with existing county facilities and systems. 
(8)	Submit petitions to the board of commissioners together with estimated assessment rates to owners of property lying with in such districts and with such recommendations as the planning director, the affected county departments and the county engineer may deem appropriate. 
(9)	Assign the appropriate county department the responsibility for coordinating the installation of the governmental service with the within such districts upon final approval by the board of commissioners. 
(10)	Perform any and all other acts or duties necessary or proper for the attainment of the purposes herein set out. 
(Code 2005, § 74-164; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 2(C)) 
Sec. 34-127. - Procedures. 
(a)	The owners of residential lots within either an existing subdivision or a discrete and definable area, or the owners of property lying within an area zoned for purposes other than residential use, may submit to the planning director, for approval, a petition for the creation of a special tax district wherein appropriate governmental services shall be installed and operated. The petition must contain the signatures of at least 66 percent of the owners of the property lying within the proposed special tax district in favor of such designation and must contain an accurate description of the property to be included by tax map parcel numbers as the same are used by the county tax assessor and the county tax commissioner. The planning director shall, within 90 days from the date of approval of the petition, submit such petition to the board of commissioners for final approval. In the event 100 percent of the owners within any such proposed district shall fail to sign such petition, a notice of a public hearing to be conducted by the board shall first be published in the newspaper in which the county advertisements are usually published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting at which the board shall consider the creation of a special tax district. 
(b)	Any other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the board of commissioners shall be authorized and empowered to create special tax districts and provide governmental services in areas in which the board of commissioners have determined that special conditions exist which uniquely affect such areas so as to warrant the creation of such districts and the provision of such services therein. In making such determination, the special conditions which the board of commissioners may consider shall include, but not be limited to, public safety, security and welfare, and the creation of such special tax districts shall be upon such terms and conditions and in such manner as the board of commissioners may deem necessary or proper. A notice of a public hearing to be conducted by the board of commissioners shall first be published in the newspaper in which county advertisements are usually published once a week for two weeks preceding the meeting at which the board of commissioners shall consider the creation of a special tax district pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2005, § 74-165; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 3) 
Sec. 34-128. - Costs and assessments. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot means any single tract of land which falls within any of the zoning classifications as defined by the zoning regulations of the county, as amended, and shall include both improved and unimproved property. 
(b)	The cost of providing and maintaining service in special tax districts created pursuant to this article shall be the actual cost of service provided plus the retirement of any construction costs incurred and an amount equal to ten percent of such sum to cover administrative expenses. Each property owner shall be responsible for and pay their pro rata share of such cost which shall be prorated among all property owners on the basis of the number of lots, whether improved or unimproved, owned by each property owner within such district. The construction costs incurred in the installation shall be retired in the manner set out by the board at the time of adoption of the special tax district. 
(c)	Any other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to establish, by resolution duly adopted, the cost of providing and maintaining service in special tax districts created pursuant to the provisions of this article as the board may deem necessary or proper. 
(d)	The county tax commissioner shall be responsible for the collection and receipt of monies in payment of the cost incurred in connection with the special tax district from the owners of property lying within same. The cost of such service shall be added to the tax statement issued annually to each such property owner. The board shall be authorized to establish, by resolution duly adopted, such other manner or method of billing, accounting, collecting and receiving of monies in payment of the cost of providing and maintaining special tax districts as the board of commissioners may deem necessary or proper. 
(Code 2005, § 74-166; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 4) 
Sec. 34-129. - Contracts authorized. 
The board of commissioners shall be authorized to enter into and make contracts with public utility companies and other firms, entities or persons for the purpose of carrying out and effecting the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 74-167; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 5(A)) 
Sec. 34-130. - Exceptions. 
The board of commissioners shall be authorized to grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Code 2005, § 74-168; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 5(B)) 
Sec. 34-131. - Streetlight districts. 
No further special tax districts shall be created under the terms of the county streetlight district ordinance and where in conflict, the provisions of this article shall take precedence. 
(Code 2005, § 74-170; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), art. 5(D)) 
Sec. 34-132. - Special provisions relating to streetlights. 
(a)	Alternative means of establishing special tax district for streetlights. 
(1)	The owners of property lying within a proposed subdivision of land may, but shall not be required to, construct and install lighting fixtures for illumination of public rights-of-way to be located within such proposed subdivision, subject to the provisions of this article. A written request for authorization to construct and install lighting fixtures signed by all owners of such property shall be submitted to the planning director on such forms as may be prescribed, from time to time, by the planning director together with plans and specifications for such lighting fixtures for approval by the planning director. Such plans and specifications shall be designed and/or approved by the public utility company which will provide electrical service to the proposed subdivision and shall include, but not be limited to, a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision showing the location of the lighting fixtures within the subdivision as required by the appropriate public utility, and a description of the fixtures, poles, and other components approved for use by such utility company. Upon approval of the plans and specifications by the planning director, such plans, specifications, and other required documents, together with the recommendation of the planning director, shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for final approval. The construction and installation of such lighting fixtures shall not commence until: 
a.	The board of commissioners have approved such plans and specifications; and 
b.	The county planning commission has approved the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shows the location of all lighting fixtures. 
(2)	In the event the planning director denies the request by such owner for authorization to construct and install such lighting fixtures, the planning director shall notify such owner in writing of such denial and the reasons therefor. Any such owner shall have the right to appeal the decision of the planning director by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning director within 30 days from the date of said notice of denial. The planning director shall thereupon submit the notice of appeal to the board of commissioners together with all plans, specifications and other documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken for placement upon the agenda of the board of commissioners for its determination. The board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)	Standards for streetlights. The American National Standards Practice of Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American Standards Institute, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the unincorporated area of the county, with the following exceptions: 
(1)	Lighting fixtures installed within public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level except that on local or residential streets, it may not be less than one-sixth of this average. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as set forth in the following table: 

 
(2)	Lighting fixtures installed within public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. 
(3)	Lighting fixtures installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for any other purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2005, § 74-171; Ord. of 4-19-2004(2), app. A) 
Secs. 34-133—34-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 34-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Finance department means the department handling financial affairs and accounting of Jackson County, Georgia. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise, but excluding single-family residence leased in its entirety for a period of not less than one month. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. However, the term "occupant" shall not include state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, and who occupy rooms in any hotel for a period of one or more consecutive days. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of these premises, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating that hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Quarterly period means the quarter of any year as follows: The first quarter is composed of the months of January, February, and March; the second quarter is composed of the months of April, May and June; the third quarter is composed of the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter composed of the months of October, November and December. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-142. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)	Authority of finance department. The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the imposition of the tax. 
(b)	Rules and regulations. The director of the finance department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)	Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the director of the finance department may require. 
(d)	Examination of records; audits. The director of the finance department or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)	Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the finance department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the director of the finance department when he requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy and such other information as the director of the finance department may require. 
(f)	Disclosure of business of operators; limitation on rule. The director of the finance department or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any matter the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty; the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this chapter. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(g)	Business license renewal. Prior to presenting an application to the appropriate county department for the renewal of operator's business license, the operation will be required to obtain a letter from the director of the finance department stating that all collections due under this article have been made and are current. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 2, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-143. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the board of commissioners to impose the tax. It specifically shall not apply to any person not licensed by or required to be licensed by the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging, or accommodations are frequently furnished for value. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 3, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-144. - Penalty for fraudulent returns, report. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director of the finance department or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of a violation of this article. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 4, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-145. - Use of funds; penalty for violation. 
(a)	All proceeds generated from the assessment of a hotel/motel occupancy tax shall be spent only for those benefit the citizens of Jackson County, Georgia. The director of [the] finance department shall maintain a separate accounting of the proceeds generated under this article. These funds shall be spent and disbursed only upon the vote of the county commission in accordance with the law. 
(b)	Any violation of this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment up to 30 days or both. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 5, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-146. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3.7)(a), there is hereby levied and assessed and there shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the county. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after September 1, 2010, although this occupancy is had pursuant to the contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to that date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed, or falling due shall be subject to the tax to the extent that it covers any portion of the period from September 1, 2010. This payment, bill, charge, or rent due shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratio of the number of days covered thereby. Where any tax has been paid therefore, the director of the finance department may, by regulation, provide for a credit or refund of the amount of that tax upon application therefore as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 6, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-147. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in the county is liable for the tax. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the county except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the licensing and revenue manager, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this chapter, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this county, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 34-148, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 7, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-148. - Collection of tax by operator, receipt of occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 34-147, and renting guestrooms in the county, not exempted under section 34-150 shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand shall give the occupant a receipt therefore. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The director of the finance department shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 8, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-149. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 9, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-150. - Exemptions. 
The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to: 
(1)	Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(2)	The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. 
(3)	Any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for the purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)	Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 10, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-151. - Registration of operator, form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)	Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the director of the finance department on a form provided by the manager. Persons engaged in this business must so register no later than 15 days after the date the tax becomes effective and is imposed as set forth in section 34-146; but the privilege of registration imposed after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment of collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the director of the finance department may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner, and in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The director of the finance department shall, after this registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall not be assignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the director of the finance department upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(b)	If the director of the finance department deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration pursuant to this article of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, he may prescribe provisions therefore other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to affect the purposes of this article. For these purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided in this section. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 11, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-152. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)	Due date of taxes. The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this county. All amounts of these taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the county monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)	Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the director of the finance department, in such form as he may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax pursuant to this article during that monthly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of taxes when due and payable to the county. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(d)	Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the director of the finance department in a manner prescribed by the said director. 
(e)	Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deductions from state tax shall be the same rate authorized for deduction from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sale and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(f)	Extension of time for filing a return and paying tax. For a good cause, the director of the finance department may extend, but not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension, shall pay in addition to the tax interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of this extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 12, 9-20-2010) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, except as indicated below, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 2005, § 78-1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Secs. 36-2—36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRUCK TRAFFIC[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

Sec. 36-21. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the unincorporated county; to establish standards for prohibiting trucks and tractor-trailers from traveling, parking or entering residential subdivision streets and from overnight parking on the rights-of-way in the county; and to restrict truck traffic from certain roads in the county. 
(Code 2005, § 78-32; Ord. of 8-20-2001) 
Sec. 36-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential subdivision means an area with streets designed primarily for residential and accessory traffic that are primarily interior subdivision streets and specifically including all residential areas platted and regulated by the county subdivision regulations. 
Truck means any vehicle used for hauling or carrying a load where the overall length is over 30 feet and the vehicle has over six wheels and specifically including tractors pulling trailers whether loaded or unloaded and, notwithstanding the foregoing, any vehicle which weighs more than the applicable state limit for travel on county road systems. 
(Code 2005, § 78-33; Ord. of 8-20-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 36-23. - Prohibition on through trucks. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any truck to travel certain county roads listed in this article unless the vehicle trip originates or ends on such road or is made for the purpose of making a delivery to a site on such road. All such roads shall be posted with signs at each end of such road that state, "No Through Trucks." At the board of commissioners' discretion such signs may also be posted at the intersection of any such road with other roads. 
(b)	This article shall apply to roads specifically authorized in this article by the board of commissioners and as later added to and deleted from by resolution of the board. This article shall apply to those county roads listed on exhibit A to the ordinance from which this article is derived, incorporated by reference, which is on file in the county offices. 
(Code 2005, § 78-35; Ord. of 8-20-2001, § 3) 
Sec. 36-24. - Prohibition on travel in residential subdivisions. 
No truck shall enter, travel or park on a street in a residential subdivision in the county, except for the purpose of delivering goods to houses or points within such residential subdivision for short periods of time during daylight hours. 
(Code 2005, § 78-36; Ord. of 8-20-2001, § 4) 
Sec. 36-25. - Overnight stay. 
No truck or tractor-trailer shall enter, travel or park on a street in a residential subdivision or park on a right-of-way in the county for the purpose of an overnight stay by the driver or operator. 
(Code 2005, § 78-37; Ord. of 8-20-2001, § 5) 
Secs. 36-26—36-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 36-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arterial road means a street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow, is of considerable continuity, and is used as a traffic artery for interconnection among large areas. These streets are designated to have a right-of-way width of 100 feet. 
Collector road means a street which carries traffic from activity centers on local streets to arterial streets. The streets are designated to have a right-of-way width of 80 feet. 
Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties or developments, serving to carry traffic to collector streets or arterial streets. Local streets comprise all streets not classified as collector or arterial. 
Miles per hour means the rate of speed or number of miles in an hour that a vehicle is traveling along a street or road. 
Roadway means any public road or street which is an arterial road, collector road or local street. 
Speed limit means the posted number corresponding to the number on the speedometer of a motorized vehicle representing the maximum allowable speed for a vehicle traveling along county maintained roadway in the county. 
Speedometer means a device showing rate of speed. 
(Code 2005, § 78-71; Ord. of 8-14-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 36-55. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 2005, § 78-75; Ord. of 8-14-2004, § 4(C)) 
Sec. 36-56. - Speed limits established. 
(a)	Speed limits enumerated. Unless otherwise posted or listed in the county speed limit schedule, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived, made a part of this article by reference and on file in the county offices, are as follows: 
(1)	Local streets in residential subdivisions. The speed limits upon local streets within residential subdivisions in the county shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(2)	Other local streets. The speed limits upon other local streets in the county shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(3)	Collector roads. The speed limits upon collector roads in the county shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(4)	Arterial roads. The speed limits upon arterial roads in the county shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(b)	Listed roads. The lists of speed limits for specific roads which are attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and made a part herein by reference and on file in the county offices, are as follows: 
(1)	Part A is the list of roads approved for the use of speed detection devices. 
(2)	Part B is an additional list of roads which the county has found to be in need of a speed limit different than listed in this section. 
The county may amend these lists by resolution at any time. Such speed limits shall be effective after inclusion on such list and after the posting of same on the designated road. 
(Code 2005, § 78-72; Ord. of 8-14-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 36-57. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the county sheriff's department and the state patrol. 
(Code 2005, § 78-73; Ord. of 8-14-2004, § 4(A)) 
Sec. 36-58. - Violation. 
In case of any violation of this article, the county sheriff's department and the state patrol shall institute appropriate action or proceeding as authorized or required by law. 
(Code 2005, § 78-74; Ord. of 8-14-2004, § 4(B)) 
Sec. 36-59. - List of roadways. 
A list of the county roadways and speed limits is kept and maintained by the clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water resources center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide for the development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)	Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(b)	Enforcement. 
(1)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)	The public development department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-12, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-2010) 
Secs. 38-2—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; authority to provide for the development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

Sec. 38-19. - Findings. 
(a)	The county water and sewerage authority was created by an act of the Georgia Legislature in 1986 appearing in 1986 Georgia laws, page 5473, referred to in this article as the "authority" for the general purpose to acquire, equipment, construct, maintain and operate adequate water supplies, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment and distribution facilities, making such facilities and services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in the county and its environs, including municipalities inside and outside such county, and to adjoining counties. 
(b)	The constitution of the state provides in article IX, section II, paragraph I, (Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I) that: "the governing authority of each county shall have legislative power to adopt clearly reasonable ordinances, resolutions, or regulations relating to its property, affairs, etc.", and provides in article IX, section II, paragraph III, (Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II) for the exercise of supplementary powers in regard to police protection. 
(c)	The county, by and through its board of commissioners, hereby approves of and desires the creation of certain regulations pertaining to the providing of water to consumers by the authority. 
(Code 2005, § 82-31; Ord. of 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 38-20. - Purpose and public notification. 
(a)	The purpose of this article shall be to install emergency procedures to prevent threats to public health and safety arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can be reasonably expected to cause, significant imminent harm to limited water resources. 
(b)	The public shall be notified that this article is in effect, and which step is being implemented, through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the authority's bulletin board at its offices and on the bulletin board located at the county courthouse at least 24 hours prior to this article, or to the particular step, being enforced. 
(Code 2005, § 82-32; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 3) 
Sec. 38-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business using high volumes of water means a water customer using more than 50,000 gallons of water per day. 
Essential services means health care, sanitation, cooking needs and fire protection. 
Inside city means inside the city limits of a municipality. 
Low pressure means less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi). 
Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering, noncommercial car washing, and filling of private swimming pools. 
Outside city means outside the city limits of a municipality. 
Water shortage plan. 
(1)	Step 1. Step 1 means the public shall be notified to begin voluntary water conservation measures through the news media and by posting notification on the bulletin board located at the authority's office at 117 MLK Avenue and on the bulletin board located in the county courthouse. The public notice shall be advisory, and request water customers to cease outside water usage all together or during specified hours. 
(2)	Step 2. Step 2 means there should be no outside water usage during days and hours recommended by the authority's superintendent and affirmed by the authority board. The authority superintendent shall approve all use of the authority's distribution system to fill a tank truck or to directly fill a swimming pool from a fire hydrant. The standard used by the authority to exercise this discretion shall be: 
a.	To protect either storage volumes or system pressures from dropping below section 38-24 levels; and 
b.	To protect the water supply to ensure that public health and safety are not imminently threatened. 
(3)	Step 3. Step 3 means there shall be no outside water usage during days and hours as determined by the authority. Businesses using high volumes of water may be put under significant restrictions by the authority. When exercising this discretion, the authority shall consider: 
a.	The effect that a high-volume user has on causing the level mentioned in section 38-24; 
b.	Whether limiting a business' hours or days of operation will allow water levels to exceed the levels mentioned in section 38-24; and 
c.	The increased water supply generated by any restrictions to best promote public health and safety. 
(4)	Step 4. Step 4 means all outdoor water use shall be banned. Water may be rationed for essential purposes only. Commercial and industrial users shall be restricted in accordance with a plan adopted by the authority. 
(Code 2005, § 82-33; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 38-22. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	A violation of the rules and regulations of the county water and sewerage authority, as such exist from time to time, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(b)	Prosecutions for violations of this article shall be commenced by the completion, signing and service of a citation by any agent of the county who is authorized by the board of commissioners, to issue citations, including, but not limited to, the county attorney, the code compliance officer, or by any agent of the county water and sewerage authority who is authorized by the authority, to issue citations, including, but not limited to, the attorney who regularly represents the authority. 
(c)	Any person violating any provisions of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12. O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. shall govern the trial of any violation of this article, and any violation of this article may be tried upon citation as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 2005, § 82-34; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 3) 
Sec. 38-23. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all users of the authority water system whether located inside municipalities or outside municipalities and regardless of whether located inside or outside the county. Surcharges under this article shall be as determined from time to time by the authority. 
(Code 2005, § 82-35; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 2) 
Sec. 38-24. - Implementing step 1. 
Step 1 shall be implemented if the authority exceeds 75 percent of its permitted water withdrawal amount or maximum safe production level for one day or if low pressure or loss of service is experienced, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step 1 shall remain in effect until all factors are relieved and shall cease when the authority determines that an adequate supply of water to fulfill public needs exists. The authority's decision shall be made upon recommendation of the superintendent and shall be subject to being approved or modified by the authority at the authority's next meeting. The public shall be notified of the termination of step 1 through the news media and by removing prior notice from the authority and county bulletin boards. 
(Code 2005, § 82-36; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 4) 
Sec. 38-25. - Implementing step 2. 
Step 2 shall be implemented if step 1 is not effective in restoring water levels above the levels described in section 38-24, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step 2 shall remain in effect until the factor that invoked step 1 is relieved for two weeks from the last date on which one or more factors occurred. When step 2 is withdrawn, step 1 shall be reimplemented. 
(Code 2005, § 82-37; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2. § 5) 
Sec. 38-26. - Implementing step 3. 
Step 3 shall be implemented if step 2 fails to prevent loss of service, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step 3 shall remain in effect until loss of service ceases. When step 3 is withdrawn, step 2 measures shall be reimplemented. 
(Code 2005, § 82-38; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 6) 
Sec. 38-27. - Implementing step 4. 
Step 4 shall be implemented when step 3 fails to prevent loss of service, or if directed by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Step 4 shall remain in effect until loss of service ceases. When step 4 is withdrawn, step 3 shall be reimplemented. 
(Code 2005, § 82-39; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 38-28. - Extreme cases. 
(a)	In extreme cases of loss of service, the authority may authorize closing valves in the water distribution system. When exercising this discretion, the authority shall: 
(1)	Make water available to private consumers from fire hydrants that are equipped to dispense water to the consumers' private containers; 
(2)	Fully consider the needs of medical facilities; and 
(3)	If possible, avoid the interruption of fire protection. 
(b)	When determining extreme cases, the authority shall consider: 
(1)	Loss of service; 
(2)	Available water supply; and 
(3)	The threat posed to public health and safety by continued water usage. 
(Code 2005, § 82-40; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 2, § 8) 
Sec. 38-29. - Taps by other than authorized persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the county and/or the authority in the performance of such employee's duties as such, to tap into or make any opening in connection with the water mains or water lines of the authority. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the county and/or the authority in the performance of such employee's duties to open a fire hydrant belonging to the authority. 
(Code 2005, § 82-41; Ord. of 6-14-2000, art. 1, § 1) 
Secs. 38-30—38-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSTALLATION AND RELOCATION OF UTILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Form A, referred to as the "general permit," Form B, referred to as the "supplemental permit," and Form C, referred to as a "special assurances" form, have been omitted from this recodification. Copies of such forms are on file in the office of the county clerk. 

Sec. 38-47. - Permit required. 
No person shall place or relocate any utilities in any right-of-way of the county without obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 82-71; Ord. of 10-20-1994) 
Sec. 38-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Right-of-way means a general term denoting land, property, interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired or devoted to transportation purposes. 
Utility means all privately, publicly or cooperatively owned water distribution and sanitary sewer facilities and systems for producing, transmitting or distributing communication, cable television, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, steam, wastewater and stormwater not connected with highway drainage, including river gauges, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner of any utility or utility facility described in this definition. 
(Code 2005, § 82-72; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § I) 
Sec. 38-49. - Permits. 
(a)	Requirements. All utility owners shall be required to apply for and obtain written permission from the road department and the board of commissioners before installing or making substantial changes to any utility facilities on the county system or on projects which the county has completed. Permittees shall also be required to install facilities adjacent to the right-of-way so as to require trimming on the right-of-way, or the cutting of any paved surface for utility maintenance. A separate permit shall be required for each county right-of-way where the installation is proposed. Service connections which involve setting a new pole on the right-of-way, trenching in the roadbed, cutting of pavement or boring beneath the pavement will require a permit. A blanket permit may be obtained annually to cover all other service connections in the county. 
(b)	Types. 
(1)	General encroachment permit. The county has adopted Form A as a general permit to be used for all types of utility installations which encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(2)	Blasting permit. In addition to the general encroachment permit, a supplemental permit will be required when the utility proposes to do any work involving the use of explosives within or under the roadbed. Form B has been adopted for this purpose. 
(c)	Terms and conditions. A proposed utility installation must comply with all the applicable requirements and provisions of this article, and any other special instructions or special provisions which the road department and the board of commissioners may stipulate, before a permit shall be approved. The applicant, in accepting the permit, agrees to abide by the terms and conditions thereof. Failure to comply with terms of the permit during the installation, operation and maintenance of utility facilities within the right-of-way may result in revocation of the permit and removal of facilities from the right-of-way. 
(Code 2005, § 82-73; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § II) 
Sec. 38-50. - Permit application and approval procedure. 
(a)	Location for submission. Application for utility encroachment permits shall be made to the road department. 
(b)	Authority to approve. The road department and board of commissioners will have full authority to approve permits for routine installations which are in accordance with this article and located on highway rights-of-way. 
(Code 2005, § 82-74; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § III) 
Sec. 38-51. - Allocation of costs. 
(a)	Permit fee. There shall be no charge for the issuance of the permit. 
(b)	Installation costs. The entire cost of installing, maintaining, repairing, operating, or using the pole line, buried cable, pipeline, or miscellaneous utility facility, performing miscellaneous utility facility, performing miscellaneous operations and any other expense whatsoever incidental to the facilities or operations authorized by the permit, shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)	Reimbursement of county expense. The applicant shall, in addition to subsection (b) of this section, reimburse the county for any reasonable and necessary expense including, but not limited to, extraordinary inspection services by county personnel, that the county may incur in connection with the facilities or operations authorized by the permit. The reimbursement to the county shall be made by the applicant within 30 days after receiving a statement from the county. 
(d)	Materials within the right-of-way. The applicant, upon notification in writing by the county, shall pay a reasonable market price for any materials removed from the right-of-way or destroyed as result of operations authorized by the permit. 
(Code 2005, § 82-75; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § IV) 
Sec. 38-52. - Liability and control. 
(a)	Damages resulting from installation. The applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the county, road department and board of commissioners, the members thereof, and all officers, employees or agents of the county or the road department and board of commissioners, or any political subdivision thereof, against any and all damages, claims, demands, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses of whatsoever nature, which may result from any injury to, or the death of, any persons or from the loss of, or damages to property of any kind or nature, including the right-of-way and right-of-way facilities or structures, property or equipment used or owned by the county or the road department and board of commissioners, and facilities which occupy the right-of-way, when such injury, death, loss or damages arises out of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair, removal, relocation, operation or use of the pole line, buried cable, pipeline, or miscellaneous utility facility covered by the permit, or out of miscellaneous operations authorized by the permit. 
(b)	Injury or damage to utilities. The county, road department and the board of commissioners, their officers or employees shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to facilities covered by the permit, or to any connection thereto, by reason of right-of-way maintenance and construction activities or right-of-way contractor or permittee operations. The county's contractor, officers or employees shall not be held liable for any damage that may occur to utility facilities after the utility owner has been notified of a conflict with construction and given reasonable time to relocate the facilities. 
(c)	Pavement repair liability. Following the patching or tunneling underneath of any paved surface, the applicant shall be responsible for the condition of such pavement, shoulders and patches, and shall upon request from the county, repair to the county's satisfaction any of such pavement shoulders or patches which become settled, cracked, broken or otherwise faulty. 
(d)	Protection of public. The applicant shall employ any and all methods in performing the operations authorized by the permit which the county may require in order to properly protect the public from injury and the right-of-way from damage. The utility owner shall have sole responsibility for the adequacy and safety of the design and engineering of its facilities. 
(e)	Inspection of work. The county reserves the right to inspect the work during such periods as it deems necessary to check compliance with the terms of the permit by the applicant, and to require the applicant to correct all deviations from the approved permit. If the county is required to incur additional or unusual expense to ensure compliance with the terms of the permit due to inadequate control procedures by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse the county for such additional cost of inspection and any repairs the county must make to the right-of-way. Any supervision or control exercised by the county shall in no way relieve the applicant of any duty or responsibility to the general public, nor shall such supervision or control relieve the applicant from any liability for loss, damage or injury to persons or property as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)	Work by utility contractors. When the applicant shall contract for any work to be performed on the public right-of-way under authority of the permit, the contractor shall agree in writing prior to beginning work, that such work will be performed in accordance with this article and be subject to inspection by the county to insure compliance therewith. The written agreement shall further provide that the county shall be held harmless for any extra expense or damages to the contractor as a result of any action the county may require to correct all deviations from this article. This agreement may be made a part of continuing contracts or bid contract documents. If not included in the contract, it shall be completed prior to work beginning. A suitable form for the required special assurances is included as Form C. When any contractor develops a history of poor performance, the county reserves the right to require the contractor to furnish a surety bond in an amount specified by the county in accordance with section 38-53(a). Upon continued refusal of a contractor to comply with county rules, regulations and standards, the county may ban such contractor from working within the public right-of-way. 
(g)	Final permit authority. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final and conclusive with respect to any of the conditions, terms, stipulations and provisions of the permit. 
(Code 2005, § 82-76; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § V) 
Sec. 38-53. - Insurance and bond. 
(a)	Requirements for insurance. When requested in writing by the county, the applicant or his contractor shall obtain and carry, for the period of time required for the complete installation of the facilities authorized by the permit, including the repair and restoration of the right-of-way facilities, and also during such future periods of time when operations are performed involving the repair, relocation or removal of the facilities authorized by the permit, a liability and property damage insurance policy, holding the county harmless from any damages arising out of operations performed or authorized by the permit. The insurance shall provide, as a minimum, coverage in the following amounts: $200,000.00 property damage resulting from any single occurrence, and $1,000,000.00 for the death or injury of any person, subject to a limit of $2,000,000.00 for injuries or death resulting from any single occurrence. The insurance policy shall be with an insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state. A copy of the policy, or certificate evidencing such coverage, shall be submitted to the county, and must be approved, before any work is commenced under the permit. 
(b)	Requirement for bond. When requested in writing by the county, the applicant or his contractor shall furnish, for the period of time required for the complete installation of the facilities authorized by the permit, including the repair and restoration of the right-of-way facilities, and also during such future periods of time when operations are performed involving the repair, relocation or removal of said facilities authorized by the permit a surety bond in the amount specified in the special provisions of the permit. The bond shall be written by a surety company duly qualified and licensed to do business in the state. No work shall be commenced under the permit until the bond has been submitted to and approved by the county. 
(Code 2005, § 82-77; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § VI) 
Sec. 38-54. - Installations details. 
(a)	Plans to accompany permit. The applicant shall submit, with his permit application, letter size prints of a satisfactory plan showing in detail the location of his proposed facility or operation as described in the said permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to right-of-way features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the right-of-way and its operation. Four prints of the plan are normally required. The plans shall show: 
(1)	Design pressure of pipe. 
(2)	Normal operating pressure. 
(3)	Maximum operating pressure. 
Plans shall also show whether cathodic protection is to be provided and the proposed method for insulating bridge members from electrical currents. When explosives are to be used, a detailed operational plan must be submitted as part of the supplemental permit application. The blasting operation procedures form describes the information to be submitted. 
(b)	Construction and work requirements. 
(1)	Compliance with plans. The applicant's completed facility shall be in substantial conformance with the plans required by subsection (a) of this section. When changes are required and approved on construction, the applicant shall prepare revised "as built" plans and furnish two copies for the county's permit record files. 
(2)	Work standards. All work in connection with the facility authorized by the permit shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner to the satisfaction of the county. All utility installation shall also conform with the applicable sections of this article and any amendments, rules and regulations of the state public service commission and the standards adopted thereby, and any specifications or special provisions which may be made a part of the permit by the county. 
(3)	Notice of work beginning. The applicant shall notify the road department at least 24 hours before starting any work under the permit. Applicants must present their work schedule and plan for traffic control for approval by the county's representative. 
(4)	Notice of work completion. The applicant shall notify the county when the installation authorized by the permit has been completed so that an inspection can be made by the department's representative to ensure that provisions of the permit have been met and that all areas within the right-of-way have been adequately restored. 
(Code 2005, § 82-78; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § VII) 
Editor's note— The blasting operation procedures form is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 38-55. - Traffic protection. 
(a)	Traffic control. A written traffic control plan will be submitted with each permit application for work requested within the rights-of-way. Companies which have a written traffic control plan approved by the county may meet this requirement by reference to the appropriate parts of the plan in their permit application. During the initial installation or construction of the facilities authorized by the permit, or during any future repair, removal or operations, the applicant shall, at all times, maintain flaggers, signs, lights, flares, barricades, and other safety devices as approved by the permit or as the county may reasonably deem necessary to properly safeguard the public against injury or damage. As a minimum, the applicant must comply with the manual on uniform traffic control devices. The applicant shall provide a watchman, as required, to maintain said signs, lights, flares, barricades and other safety devices during nonwork hours, and shall, upon request furnish the county the telephone number and/or address of such watchman. 
(b)	Restriction against interference with traffic. The applicant shall so conduct his operations that there will be a minimum of interference with or interruption of traffic upon and along the county. This applies to both the initial installation and the continuing maintenance and operation of facilities. Except in emergencies, there shall be no interference with or interruption of traffic upon and along the county until a plan for the satisfactory handling of traffic has been worked out and approved by the county. The county reserves the right to prohibit any work which may interfere with traffic movement during times of peak traffic flow. 
(Code 2005, § 82-79; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § VIII) 
Sec. 38-56. - Maintenance. 
(a)	General restrictions. The applicant shall at all times keep facilities authorized by the permit in a good state of repair from the standpoint of both structure and appearance. The county may revoke the permit and order removal of any facilities which may become a hazard to the public or the roadway due to improper maintenance practices. 
(b)	Notice to county department. The utility shall give 24 hours' advance notice to the road department, or its local representative, before undertaking any of the following maintenance activities within the county right-of-way: 
(1)	Any work which requires the blocking of one or more traffic lanes for a period of time in excess of two hours. 
(2)	Installation of any temporary structures which are to remain on the right-of-way. 
(3)	The cutting, trimming or spraying of any trees or shrubs within the right-of-way. 
(4)	Making any pavement cut except in an emergency. 
(5)	Making any excavation within the roadbed which may remain open overnight. 
(Code 2005, § 82-80; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § IX) 
Sec. 38-57. - Approval and notice of other agencies. 
(a)	Additional permit or license. Nothing in the permit shall be construed to grant rights or imply approval in areas not falling within the authority and jurisdiction of the county. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to determine the need for, and to obtain, such license, permit, or other form of approval which may be required by other state or local agencies, federal agencies, or railroads. 
(b)	Utilities on active construction projects. When right-of-way construction is underway, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish a schedule for making the new utility installation that is compatible with project construction. Written approval of such schedule by the right-of-way contractor shall be furnished to the county prior to beginning work. Upon request the county will assist in resolving any disputes over work schedules or in arranging for emergency access to utility facilities within an active project. 
(c)	Notice to other utilities. The applicant shall give due notice to owners of any other known overhead, underground or other utility facilities at the described location which may be impacted by installation of the applicant's facility, notifying them of the work proposed under the permit and the date of their proposed work. 
(Code 2005, § 82-81; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § X) 
Sec. 38-58. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)	Term of permit. If work begins within 12 months after issuance, and unless otherwise provided in the special provisions, the permit shall be in effect for an indefinite period of time from and after the date issued, unless sooner revoked by mutual consent or by the county for failure of the applicant to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit or by operation of law. A permit is automatically revoked when the utility for which the permit is issued ceases or abandons the operations. 
(b)	Cancellation for cause. Failure of the applicant, within a reasonable time after written notice from the county, to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the permit shall be sufficient cause for cancellation of the permit. 
(c)	Assignment or transfer. The permit, and the privileges granted, and the obligations of the permittee created thereby, shall be binding upon the successors and assigns of the permittee. The permittee shall give the county written notice of any such assignment or transfer within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(d)	Time limit on beginning work. If the applicant fails to commence installation of the pole line, buried cable, pipeline, miscellaneous facility, or other miscellaneous operations covered by the permit within 12 months from the date the permit is issued, such permit shall be deemed null and void and all privileges thereunder forfeited, unless a written extension of time is obtained from the county. 
(e)	Restriction against varied use. Subject to safety regulations in effect in the state, the following precautionary measures are applicable to pipeline crossings: 
(1)	Required permit information. Pipeline crossing permits shall specify the transmittant (or class of transmittants), the maximum working or test pressures (or potential) and the design standards for the carrier. 
(2)	Changes subsequent to permit approval. 
a.	For encased carriers, the utility company will be required to give advance notice of change of transmittant or increase in working or potential pressure. 
b.	For encased carriers, the utility will be required to renegotiate the occupancy before changing transmittant or increasing working or potential pressure. 
(Code 2005, § 82-82; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § XI) 
Sec. 38-59. - Installation identification. 
In order to identify the work during installation, the permittee shall place a card sign on the right-of-way near the work before beginning the installation. The sign shall be visible from the traveled way and shall be placed not less than six feet above the ground and at least one per mile. The sign will be furnished to the applicant by the county along with the approved permit. 
(Code 2005, § 82-83; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § XII) 
Sec. 38-60. - Coordination of requirements. 
In the case of any discrepancy between the requirements of this article and the plans or special provisions attached to the permit, the following order of control shall govern: 
(1)	Plans attached to the permit shall govern over this article; and 
(2)	Special provisions shall govern over this article and plans attached to the permit. 
(Code 2005, § 82-84; Ord. of 10-20-1994, § XIII) 
Appendix A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Unified Development Code of the county, as adopted by the county on September 9, 2003, and amended through October 20, 2008. Amendments to this Code are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and errors of punctuation have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - ADOPTION, APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 101. - Purpose of Article 1. 
This Article sets out the legal basis for the Unified Development Code and its broad purposes, describes the lands to which and circumstances under which the Code applies, and describes how the Code is to be interpreted when certain words or phrases are used or uncertainty of meaning may exist. 
Sec. 102. - Title and authority. 
(a)	Title. This Development Code regulates the use of land, the location and use of buildings and other site improvements, and the construction of public facilities and private improvements related to the development of land. This Development Code shall be known as and may be cited as "The Unified Development Code of Jackson County, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Development Code." 
(b)	Authority. This Development Code is adopted under authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.) and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly. 
Sec. 103. - Adoption; [Effective date]. 
This Development Code shall take effect upon its adoption by Board of Commissioners of Jackson County, Georgia. 
Sec. 104. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this Development Code is to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, and is intended: 
(1)	To promote the orderly and beneficial development and expansion of the County; 
(2)	To provide adequate access to natural light and air; 
(3)	To provide adequate water, sewerage, and surface drainage; 
(4)	To prevent undesirable overcrowding of population; 
(5)	To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(6)	To promote the orderly and desirable subdivision and development of land; 
(7)	To insure the orderly and desirable construction of streets; 
(8)	To promote the orderly and desirable development of public and private utilities and services; and, 
(9)	To insure proper legal description and recordation of all subdivided land. 
(b)	Intent in interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Development Code all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the property owner; and, 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(c)	Intent relative to private property agreements. This Development Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant or deed restriction duly recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court, to the extent that such easement, covenant or deed restriction is more restrictive than the requirements imposed by this Development Code. 
Sec. 105. - General applicability. 
(a)	Lands to which this Code applies. This Development Code applies to all lands within the unincorporated areas of Jackson County, Georgia. 
(b)	Use of land or structures. 
(1)	No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, located, extended, moved, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this Development Code. 
(2)	No part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required in connection with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with this Development Code shall be included as part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required for any other use or structure, unless specifically allowed under the provisions of this Development Code. 
(3)	Street rights-of-way shall not be considered a part of a lot or front yard setback for the purpose of meeting the minimum requirements of this Development Code. 
(c)	One principal house on a lot. With respect to single-family detached dwellings, only one principal building and its customary accessory uses, buildings and structures may be erected on any one lot. 
(d)	Lot reduction prohibited. No yard or lot existing prior to the effective date of this Development Code or any subsequent amendment to it shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Development Code. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Development Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Development Code. 
(e)	Nuisances. No property owner, agent, or tenant shall create or maintain a nuisance on any property that they own or occupy. A nuisance constitutes any condition that is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or public welfare or which is detrimental to the property of another. A condition considered to be a nuisance includes, but is not confined to any of the following: garbage, trash, weeds, building materials or debris; abandoned, discarded, or unused objects; junk or collections of such equipment as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, boxes, or containers. Additionally, no grass, underbrush or weeds shall be permitted or allowed to grow to a height greater than 12 inches above ground level; however, this does not apply to agriculturally zoned property, property used for agricultural purposes, county-designated green space of residentially zoned property, or areas of residentially zoned property, other than platted lots, existing in their natural, undisturbed state. 
( Ord. No. 14-001, § (1), 1-20-2014 ; Ord. No. 16-001 , § 1, 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 106. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Previously issued permits. The provisions of this Development Code and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective building permit or development permit if: 
(1)	The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Development Code or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within 6 months of issuance of the permit; and 
(2)	The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Development Code in effect on the date of the permit expiration. 
(3)	In the case of a subdivision, development of each lot within a final plat approved prior to the effective date of this Development Code, and development of future phases of a subdivision contained within a preliminary subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this Development Code, may proceed under the provisions of subparagraphs 106(a)(1) and (2), above. 
(b)	Governmental bodies. All governmental bodies and authorities legally exempt from regulation under the police power of Jackson County are exempt from the regulations contained in this Development Code. 
Sec. 107. - Interpretation. 
(a)	Responsibility for interpretation. 
(1)	The Director of Planning & Development shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provision of this Development Code. 
(2)	Interpretations of the Director of Planning & Development may be appealed under the provisions of this Development Code relating to Appeals. 
(b)	Use of figures and examples for illustration. 
(1)	Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Development Code are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
(2)	When an example of the application of a specific provision is given, or other explanatory text is provided, such example or text is identified by placement in a shaded box separate from the regulatory paragraphs in this Development Code. Such examples or explanatory text are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the provision or the requirements of this Development Code as written. 
(c)	Use of words and phrases. For the purpose of this Development Code, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
(1)	Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
(2)	References to the "County" and to the Board of Commissioners and any public officials or appointed bodies of the County not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Development Code shall always mean Jackson County, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. These include: 
a.	The County Administrator, appointed as such by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners, or the County Administrator's designee. 
b.	The Director of Public Development, appointed as such by the County Administrator, or the Public Development Director's designee. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
c.	The Director of Transportation & Public Works, appointed as such by the County Administrator, or the Director of Transportation & Public Works' designee. 
d.	The County Engineer, appointed as such by the County Administrator, or the County Engineer's designee. 
e.	The Planning Commission, created as such and appointed by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. 
f.	The Board of Adjustment, created as such and appointed by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. 
g.	The Chief Building Official (referred to also as the "building inspector") appointed as such under the Building Code, or the Chief Building Official's designee. 
h.	The Code Enforcement Officer, appointed as such by the County Administrator, or the Code Enforcement Officer's designee. 
(3)	References to an administrative department of Jackson County shall always mean the department created by the Board of Commissioners as such. These include: 
a.	Public Development Department. References to action by the "Public Development Department" shall mean action by that administrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of Public & Development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	Transportation & Public Works Department. A reference to action by the "Transportation & Public Works Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Jackson County Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of Transportation & Public Works. 
(4)	References to public officials, departments or appointed bodies of jurisdictions other than Jackson County shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to Jackson County, Georgia. These include: 
a.	The Clerk of the Superior Court of Jackson County, Georgia. 
b.	The Jackson County Health Department. 
c.	The Oconee River Soil Conservation Service District. 
d.	The North Georgia Regional Development Center (the RDC). 
e.	The Georgia Departments of Natural Resources (DNR) and Transportation (DOT). 
f.	The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(5)	The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(6)	The words "shall," "will," "is to" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
(7)	The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
(8)	The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
(9)	The verbs "zone" and "rezone" have the same meaning and refer to the act of amending the Official Zoning Map through the process established by this Development Code. 
(10)	The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established under this Development Code. 
(11)	The word "day" means a calendar day unless otherwise specified as a work day, which means Monday through Friday excluding official County holidays. 
(12)	The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(13)	The term "zoning map" means the Official Zoning Map of Jackson County, Georgia, and may include a single map or a series of maps in sections. 
(d)	Meaning of words and phrases. 
(1)	All words and phrases are to be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, subsection, section and Article in which they occur. 
(2)	Words and phrases specifically relating to a category of use of land or a structure that are defined in this Development Code shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. Words and phrases not defined in this Development Code shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, the meaning of which may be further clarified by use of the word or phrase in the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) published by the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
(3)	Other words and phrases defined in this Development Code shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. Words and phrases not defined in this Development Code shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, the meaning of which may be further clarified by definition of the word or phrase in a dictionary of the English language in current circulation. 
(4)	Definitions are clearly identified as such and are located throughout this Development Code in the Articles or Sections to which they most readily refer. All definitions, regardless of location within an Article of this Code, apply equally to the use of such terms throughout the Code. A glossary of all defined terms is appended to the end of this Code for convenience. However, if differences in wording occur between definitions of a term, the definition contained within an Article of this Code shall control. 
ARTICLE 2. - USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 201. - Purpose of Article 2. 
This Article defines the zoning and overlay districts in the County and identifies the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various districts, including certain uses or structures for which special approval is required in order to be allowed. In addition, this Article identifies specific uses within each zoning district to which restrictions may apply. Restrictions on particular uses are presented in Article 3 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 202. - Zoning and Overlay Districts Maps. 
The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Jackson County, Georgia" adopted on the date of adoption of this Development Code, and as amended thereafter from time to time. 
(a)	Official Zoning Map adopted. 
(1)	The "Official Zoning Map of Jackson County, Georgia" (referred to in this Code as the "Zoning Map") is adopted as the Official Zoning Map and is hereby made a part of this Development Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Development Code. 
(2)	The Official Zoning Map as adopted at the time of adoption of this Development Code or as subsequently readopted in its entirety shall be identified as that map or series of maps signed by the Chairman in office at the time of adoption, and attested by the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners. A certified copy of the zoning map as originally adopted shall be kept on record in the County Clerk's office. 
(3)	The Zoning Map as adopted and as may be amended by the Board of Commissioners from time to time sets forth the location of all zoning districts and overlay districts in the County. 
(4)	[Removed 03/19/12] 
(b)	Amendments to the Zoning [Map]. 
(1)	The Zoning Map, as adopted by the Board of Commissioners and amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained and available in the Public Development Department. 
(2)	No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the Board of Commissioners or by adoption of a new Official Zoning Map of Jackson County. Such amendments shall be available for public inspection. 
(3)	All zoning district boundary changes and amendments to the Zoning Map, shall be noted on said maps maintained in the Public Development Department with the date of the change or amendment and reference to the implementing ordinance. 
(c)	Determination of zoning district boundaries. 
(1)	The boundaries of the districts as shown on the Zoning Map shall be determined on the basis of the legal descriptions or boundary surveys associated with approved zoning petitions, or, lacking such legal descriptions or surveys, on the basis of the location of the boundary as depicted on the Zoning Map, as applicable, along with any dimensions shown. 
(2)	All property in the County is placed in one or more zoning districts as indicated on the Zoning Map, and no property shall be used except in accordance with its zoning designation on the Zoning Map, conditions of zoning approval and the provisions of this Code. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)	Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following the County limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line of a street, a state highway, a railroad right-of-way, or stream or drainage way, or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(b)	Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a state highway, a railroad right-of-way, or a stream or drainage way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the street, county road, state highway, railroad right-of-way, stream or drainage way, and as being parallel to it. 
(c)	[Removed 03/19/12] 
(d)	In the case of a through lot (a "double-frontage" lot) fronting on two separate streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line approximately paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the lot. 
(e)	In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the forgoing methods, the Board of Adjustment shall, upon application of the property owner, determine the location of the boundary. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 203. - Implementation of the Comprehensive Plan. 
The Jackson County Comprehensive Plan (including a community agenda and a community assessment), as adopted and as may subsequently be amended from time to time by the Board of Commissioners, is hereby incorporated into this Development Code as if fully stated herein. The Comprehensive Plan as adopted and as may be amended from time to time shall be implemented by this Development Code. 
The use of land and structures are regulated by this Article via the establishment of zoning and overlay districts. All amendments of the boundaries of zoning and overlay districts as provided on the official zoning map shall be consistent with the character area map 2020 (or after 2020 the 2030) and the future land use plan map 2020 (or after 2020 the 2030) of the Comprehensive Plan, as specified in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2013 ) 
Sec. 204. - Zoning and overlay districts established. 
(a)	Zoning districts established. For purposes of this Development Code, the following Zoning Districts are established: 
(1)	Agricultural Districts. 
Planned Commercial Farm District (PCFD). 
Agricultural Rural Fringe District (A-1). 
Agricultural Rural Farm District (A-2). 
Agricultural Fringe District (A-3). 
(2)	Residential Districts. 
Agricultural Residential District (AR) 
Low Density Single-Family Residential District (R-1) 
Medium Density Residential District (R-2) 
Multi-Family Residential District (R-3) 
Manufactured Housing District (MH) 
(3)	Commercial Districts. 
Neighborhood Retail Commercial District (NRC) 
Community Retail Commercial District (CRC) 
Highway Retail Commercial District (HRC) 
(4)	Industrial Districts. 
Light Industrial District (LI) 
General Industrial District (GI) 
Heavy Industrial District (HI) 
(b)	Overlay districts established. For purposes of this Development Code, the following Overlay Districts are established: 
Airport Zone Overlay District (AZ) 
Airport Design Overlay District 
West Jackson Corridor District 
East Jackson Overlay District 
For a statement of purpose pertaining to the Airport Zone Overlay District, see Section 206(p) of this article. For regulations pertaining to the Airport Fly Zone Overlay Districts see Section 355. For a statement of purpose pertaining to the Airport Design Overlay District, see Section 515. For a statement of purpose pertaining to the West Overlay District, see Section 206(r) of this article. For regulations pertaining to the West Overlay District, see Article 5, Division II of this Code, Sections 510 through 514. For a statement of purpose pertaining to the East Overlay District, see Section 206(s) of this article. For regulations pertaining to the East Overlay District, see Article 5, Division II of this Code, Sections 530 through 534. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 205. - Relationship of Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Districts. 
(a)	Consistency with Character Area and Future Land Use Plan Designations. Every application to amend the Zoning Map shall be reviewed for consistency with the Comprehensive Plan as described in this subsection, and recommendations and decisions with regard to amending the Zoning Map for properties within the unincorporated portion of Jackson County shall be made in accordance with this subsection and the standards set forth in Article 12 relating to zoning amendments. 
(1)	2020 Character Area Map. The Zoning Map shall not be amended unless the zoning district proposed is consistent with the 2020 character area map of the Comprehensive Plan, which divides the county into conservation, agricultural, rural, suburban, and urban areas. In order for an application for a Zoning Map amendment ("rezoning") to be approved the zoning district(s) proposed must be for one or more of the zoning districts specifically indicated as consistent with that character area in Table 2.1. 
2020 Future Land Use Plan Map. The Zoning Map shall not be amended unless the zoning district proposed is consistent with the 2020 future land use plan map of the Comprehensive Plan, which divides the unincorporated portion of the county into appropriate future land use districts. In order for an application for a Zoning Map amendment ("rezoning") to be accepted for processing, the zoning district(s) proposed must be for one or more of the zoning districts specifically indicated as consistent with that future land use plan district in Table 2.1. 
Policies and Text of the Comprehensive Plan. The staff of the Department of Public Development and the Jackson County Planning Commission may recommend disapproval of, and the Board of Commissioners may disapprove, any application to amend the official zoning map if said application is determined to be inconsistent with: 
The written narrative in the Comprehensive Plan describing the character area assigned to the property that is the subject of the application; or 
One or more policies for the character area assigned to the property that is the subject of the application; or 
One or more policies pertaining to a particular land use proposed in the application to amend the Zoning Map; or 
One or more policies relative to other topics, including, but not limited to community facilities and services, housing, natural resources, and economic development. In applying this provision, the county may appropriately consult and cite policies, maps, and/or findings in the community assessment and/or community agenda portions of the Comprehensive Plan and may interpret the plan's intentions accordingly; or 
Any other written or graphic provision of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Table 2.1: Consistency of Zoning Districts With Character Area and Future Land Use Plan Map Designations of the Comprehensive Plan 

 
**The District has been deleted from the Code. Properties zoned in this district shall retain the zoning designation, but no property may be added to the district. 
(b)	Interpretations. The following interpretations will apply to decisions about rezoning property in relation to the 2020 character areas and 2020 future land use districts: 
(1)	Current zoning. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a property owner from using and/or developing land according to its existing zoning classifications, despite the character area or future land use designation of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)	More than one character area designation for a given property. Because of the generalized nature of the 2020 character map in relation to actual property lines, the following rule of interpretation shall apply to all properties which have more than one character designation: 
(a)	If the parcel is less than five acres in area, the more permissive (less restrictive) character area may be deemed applicable to the entire parcel of record. 
(b)	If the parcel is more than five acres in area, the parcel shall be deemed to be in more than one character area and the boundaries of the character area applicable to any given portion of the parcel shall be as shown on the character map. 
(3)	Mitigation. An application for rezoning to a zoning district that is consistent with the 2020 character area map and 2020 future land use district as specified in Table 2.1, that would result in development which on first review would appear to be inconsistent with the current development of adjoining properties in the character area and character area policies of the Comprehensive Plan may be denied unless there are clear proposals by way of voluntary conditions of zoning that would mitigate the inconsistent aspects of the subject proposal. In such cases the applicant must indicate in writing the conditions of rezoning that will satisfactorily mitigate inconsistencies. Density/intensity and sewer service inconsistencies cannot be mitigated. 
(4)	Rezoning is Subject to Legislative Discretion. Each rezoning application will be considered on its own merits and according to criteria specified in this Development Code. Although the Comprehensive Plan may support a zoning district that allows for higher density or intensity, it is within the legislative discretion of the Board of Commissioners to disapprove a particular application for rezoning based on determinations, principles, and/or criteria other than consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The Board of Commissioners may approve a rezoning at less intensity or density than that contemplated in the Comprehensive Plan and requested in the application. The determinations, principles, and/or criteria relied upon by the Board of Commissioners to approve or disapprove a rezoning or reduce the density/intensity of development authorized by a rezoning may, but are not required to, be articulated in the records of the Board of Commissioners when making a decision on a particular rezoning. 
(c)	Exception Authorizing Consistency with 2030 Character Area Designation. If a proposed rezoning is consistent with a character area designation on the 2030 map but the 2020 map of character areas does not support the zoning district proposed (via application of Table 2-1), then that rezoning application cannot be considered consistent and shall not be applied for until January 1, 2021, or thereafter, unless the 2020 character area map is amended for consistency; provided, however, that exceptions for rezoning to a zoning category not otherwise consistent with the 2020 character area map but consistent with the 2030 character area map may be permitted without amending the 2020 character area map, if the applicant demonstrates consistency with one or more of the following: 
(1)	Sanitary sewer is shown to be available or could be reasonably extended to the property in question (i.e., sewer is within one-quarter mile of the subject property); 
(2)	Approval of the rezoning would not result in development that would "leapfrog" beyond existing development of the same land use (i.e., more than one-quarter mile along the same or major fronting roadway); 
(3)	Evidence is presented that there is a market need for the development proposed in the subject rezoning, as documented by other existing development in the vicinity or along the same road or highway corridor as the subject property; 
(4)	Property rights objections are made, alleging that the property does not have a reasonable use as currently designated; including an analysis of interim development possible under the current character area designation until the year 2021. 
This subsection shall not be construed as authorizing exceptions with regard to inconsistencies with the future land use plan map. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1a, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-05, § 1a, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1a, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
Sec. 206. - Zoning and Overlay Districts, purpose of each. 
(a)	PCFD Planned Commercial Farm District. The land within Jackson County designated as Planned Commercial Farm District shall be represented by large district areas of at least 35 acres or more that are devoted to intensive agricultural production, in the areas of food crops, fiber crops, animal feed, poultry, livestock and commercial timber production. Individual farms within the district area cannot be smaller than 5 acres. Areas within this zone are not intended to be used for small scale farming, gardening, small poultry operations or idle pasture land that are more appropriately located in the Agricultural Rural Farm District or other zoning districts. The land should be in use for good faith farming or agricultural uses worthy of protection and preservation. 
The use of areas designated in PCFD may result in odors, dust, noise or other effects that may not be compatible with single-lot residential development. Specific setback requirements designated for PCFD shall apply, just as they do with commercial and industrial districts to minimize the adverse effect of the farm uses. 
If, after a tract is rezoned to PCFD, and the land is not actively used for intensive commercial agricultural purposes, the County may, at its discretion, initiate procedures for a zoning review and possible rezoning of the property. An automatic review of the zoning will occur at the end of the first year after the date of the original zoning to PCFD. 
(b)	A-1 Agricultural Rural Fringe District. The Agricultural Rural Fringe District was originally designed as a transitional district between existing agricultural uses and residential development. Because of the similarities between the A-1 and other zoning districts in terms of density, lot size and use, this district will be considered an inactive zoning district. All properties that are currently within this district will remain A-1 until rezoned to another district, but no new applications for rezoning to A-1 will be accepted after the effective date of this Code. (Added 10/15/2007) 
(c)	A-2 Agricultural Rural Farm District. The Agricultural Rural Farm District is composed chiefly of open land, small agricultural uses and individual single-family houses. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage compatibility between existing agricultural uses and the development of limited low-density residential development while maintaining the rural character of the district. This district is characterized by large acreage residential lots and farms. Institutional uses (such as churches) that are compatible with the rural environment and compatible commercial farm uses are allowed as special uses. 
Master Planned Developments are allowed within this district with special use approval. Flexibility as to lot size and configuration is allowed provided that the maximum density of the development meets the requirements of the A-2 District. A master planned development shall be restricted to single-family detached residences and accessory uses. See Article 5 of this Code. 
(d)	A-3 Agricultural Fringe District. The Agricultural Fringe District was originally designed as a transitional district between existing agricultural uses and residential development. Because of the similarities between the A-3 and other zoning districts in terms of density, lot size and use, this district will be considered an inactive zoning district. All properties that are currently within this district will remain A-3 until rezoned to another district, but no new applications for rezoning to A-3 will be accepted after the effective date of this Code. 
(e)	AR Agricultural Residential. The Agricultural Residential District is established to provide a transition between agricultural uses and residential uses. This district provides a location for light agriculture, single-family residential, residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses, and selected agricultural related commercial areas within a rural setting. When residentially compatible institutional, recreational and commercial uses are developed within the AR District, they are to be designed and built to ensure density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this Code. 
Master Planned Developments may be applied subject to special use approval, thereby allowing a smaller lot size and preservation of natural conservation areas. Flexibility as to lot size and configuration is allowed provided that the maximum density of the development meets the requirements of the AR District. A master planned development shall be restricted to single-family detached residences and accessory uses. See Article 5 of this Code. 
(f)	R-1 Low Density Single-Family Residential. The Low Density Single-Family Residential District is established to provide locations for single-family detached residential uses on individual lots, conventional subdivisions, master planned developments, and residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-1 District, they are to be designed and built to ensure density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this Code. 
Master Planned Developments are allowed within this district subject to special use approval. Flexibility as to lot size and configuration is allowed provided that the maximum density of the development meets the requirements of the R-1 District. Single-family detached residences and accessory uses, along with limited institutional uses and neighborhood commercial uses may be included as part of the master planned development site plan. See Article 5 of this Code. 
(g)	R-2 Medium Density Residential. The Medium Density Residential District is established to provide locations for various types of residential dwellings, including single-family detached residential uses or subdivisions, duplexes, townhouses and residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-2 District, they are to be designed and built to ensure density compatibility with adjacent residential dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and in Code. 
Master Planned Developments are allowed within this district subject to special use approval. Flexibility as to lot size and configuration is allowed provided that the maximum density of the development meets the requirements of the R-2 District. Single-family detached residences, two-family dwellings and limited townhouse development, along with limited institutional uses and neighborhood commercial uses may be included as part of the master planned development site plan. See Article 5 of this Code. 
(h)	R-3 Multi-Family Residential. The Multi-Family Residential District is established to provide locations for a mix of housing types, including single-family detached residential, attached single-family residential uses, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes and townhouses, and condominiums. The intention of this district is to incorporate multi-family residential within small complexes that will not create a large impact on services within the community. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the Medium Density Residential District, they are to be designed and built to ensure density compatibility with adjacent residences and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this Code. 
Master Planned Developments are allowed within this district subject to special use approval. Flexibility as to lot size and configuration is allowed provided that the maximum density of the development meets the requirements of the R-3 District. The intent of the master planned developments within this district is to accommodate residential, office and community commercial uses in a well planned, mixed use development; allow the opportunity for an integrated mixture of residential and commercial uses within the same structure or site; provide the opportunity for upper floor residential over ground floor commercial or office uses; and encourage mixed use development that reduces vehicle use. Master planned developments within the R-3 district must be predominantly residential in character, but may include single-family detached residences, two-family dwellings and limited townhouse development. See Article 5 of this Code. 
(i)	MH Manufactured Housing District. The Manufactured Housing District is established to provide locations for manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks, in addition to single family, two family or multi-family residential developments. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the Manufactured Housing District, they are to be designed and built to ensure density compatibility with adjacent residences and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this Code. 
(j)	NRC Neighborhood Retail Commercial. The Neighborhood Retail Commercial District is established to provide locations for individual businesses that reflect a neighborhood level of intensity and serve a small geographic area, that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhoods, and that are not traffic intense. Uses are to consist primarily of convenience shopping facilities and services that serve a neighborhood oriented market and which supply necessities and/or services that usually require frequent purchasing with a minimum of consumer travel. When located within a MPD, the NRC District should provide for uses that are lower intensity in nature, or design features implemented in order to ensure compatibility with adjacent dwellings. 
The following use restrictions apply to all uses in the NRC Neighborhood Retail Commercial District: 
(1)	Overnight parking of commercial vehicles (except for cars and vans used for a permitted use) is prohibited. 
(2)	Outside storage of any vehicles or automobiles that are being repaired or serviced in conjunction with a permitted use is prohibited in the NRC District. 
(3)	No light automotive repair establishment or full service gasoline station shall provide outside repair of vehicles except for replacing taillights, wiper blades, batteries and tires, and routine inspections. 
(4)	Any veterinary office use permitted within this district shall not have outside runs or dog kennels. 
(k)	CRC Community Retail Commercial. The Community Retail Commercial District is established to provide locations for office, commercial and service uses that serve several neighborhoods or a portion of the county. Uses within this District are more impact-intensive than neighborhood commercial uses, and should be located at the perimeter of residential areas and along major thoroughfares. The CRC District is intended to accommodate a range of commercial, retail, service and office uses, from a more community serving level including: medical office developments, banking and financial institutions, professional offices, community retail and services, and shopping centers anchored by grocery or drug stores. 
Master Planned Developments are allowed within this district subject to special use approval. The intent of the master planned developments within this district is to accommodate residential, office and community commercial uses in a well planned, mixed use development; allow the opportunity for an integrated mixture of residential and commercial uses within the same structure or site; provide the opportunity for upper floor residential over ground floor commercial or office uses; and encourage mixed use development that reduces vehicle use. Master planned developments within the CRC district may be predominantly nonresidential in character, but must include residential uses such as single-family detached residences, two-family dwellings, or limited townhouse or multi-family development. See Article 5 of this Code. 
The following restrictions apply to all uses in the CRC Community Retail Commercial District: 
(1)	CRC uses are intended to be developed as planned shopping centers or other coordinated development or villages that will incorporate a higher level of design and land use relationships along with greater flexibility in site planning and minimum property restrictions. Strip commercial patterns of development are discouraged. 
(2)	Overnight parking of commercial vehicles (except for cars and vans) is prohibited. 
(3)	All business, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible. 
(4)	Any accessory use involving the storage of equipment, refuse, or spare parts, or motorized vehicles under repair, shall be kept inside an enclosed building or otherwise fully shielded from public view by a fully opaque fence at least 6 feet high kept in good repair. 
(5)	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities that screens the trash receptacles from view, such as a fence or wall and opaque gate 6 feet high or higher. 
(l)	HRC Highway Retail Commercial District. Within the Highway Retail Commercial District, land uses are oriented to those, which are designated to serve the automotive traveling public. This district provides locations for retail commercial and service uses that are land intensive and have a need for major road access and visibility. The District is intended to serve the automobile, its passengers and highway users rather than individuals who use an automobile as convenience to perform necessary daily and weekly personal needs. The District is intended to be restricted to major arterials and collectors which may also have other businesses located on them. Major planned shopping centers, specialty shopping centers, big box commercial centers and villages incorporating shared access, parking and design are encouraged. 
(1)	Restrictions within the Highway Retail Commercial District. 
a.	All business, servicing, storage and processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible. For example: Off street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises and the sales of automobile fuel at service stations. 
b.	All vehicles in outside storage at auto repair shops, garages, or service stations awaiting repairs must be currently licensed by individuals other than the owner of the property of the business. 
c.	Land uses, processes, or equipment employed shall be limited to those that are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, lights (which are bright), smoke, noise or vibration. 
d.	Truck terminals and truck stops must provide acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet, plus a 50-foot taper, for trucks entering and leaving the site, and provide that truck traffic generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impeded traffic movement. 
e.	Automobile laundry or car wash areas are provided on a paved area, along with sufficient area to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 per vehicle) equals to one third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines. 
(m)	LI Light Industrial District. 
(1)	The Light Industrial District is established to provide locations for office, business park, light manufacturing and distribution/service facilities that are located on or have ready access to a major collector or arterial street. Light manufacturing facilities shall not involve heavy manufacturing or the conversion of raw materials into finished products. Light manufacturing uses shall generally consist of establishments for processing, assembling, fabricating, preparing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repairing of materials, goods or products. Such uses should be encouraged near existing like uses, in accordance with policies outlined in the Jackson County Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and are required to be developed as planned industrial developments, except as specified below. 
(2)	Individual industrial uses are allowed under the following conditions: 
a.	Such proposed use will not substantially affect or alter nearby property values; 
b.	Such proposed use is not inconsistent with the goals and policies of the Jackson County Comprehensive Plan; 
c.	The site plan for such uses provides for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and will not cause health, safety or unreasonable traffic problems in the area; 
d.	The proposed use is justified based on facts presented to indicate the need for such use. 
(3)	A business requiring a permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the handling or storage of hazardous materials is not allowed in the LI District. 
(n)	GI General Industrial District. 
(1)	The General Industrial District is established to provide locations for intensive industrial uses such as automobile repair and service, heavy manufacturing, uses involving chemicals, warehousing and storage, and other industrial uses that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of Jackson County. Sites within this district shall have direct access from an arterial or major collector road. When located at the perimeter of a Future Land Use Map Industrial category, the GI District should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale to ensure minimal impact to adjacent properties. 
(2)	The following use restrictions apply to all uses in the GI General industrial District: 
a.	A heavy manufacturing use shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any residential property line. 
b.	The subject use shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, with no outside storage except for vehicles used for the operation, unless the storage is screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than 8 feet in height. See additional requirements within the "Restrictions" chapter. 
c.	Where liquid waste is generated from the manufacturing process or air pollutants emitted, compliance with all applicable anti-pollution federal and state laws must be demonstrated. 
d.	Only incidental on-site sale of manufactured materials shall be permitted. 
(3)	A business requiring a permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the handling or storage of hazardous materials is not allowed in the HI District unless approved as a special use by the Board of Commissioners. 
(o)	HI Heavy Industrial District. The Heavy Industrial District is established to provide locations for intensive industrial uses such as landfills, quarries, and other industrial uses that are potential public nuisances and are potentially dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of Jackson County. Sites within this district shall be located with access only from a State or U.S. numbered highway, or a county road meeting industrial road standards. When located at the perimeter of a Future Land Use Map Industrial category, the HI District should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale to ensure minimal impact to adjacent properties. In addition to other restrictions, the following shall apply: 
a.	Bulk storage tanks including natural gas or fuel storage stations with no above ground storage facilities may not be located closer than 500 feet to a Residential District. All such storage must meet Fire Department Standards. 
b.	A well impact and soil analysis is required and subject to approval by the Board of Commissioners for any bulk storage tank facility. 
(p)	AZ Airport Zone Overlay District. The Airport Zone Overlay District is created to established certain zones that include all of the land lying beneath the flight approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Jackson County airport, in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration requirements. The AZ District overlays the zoning classification of properties under these flight zones in order to restrict heights of buildings and other obstructions to safe aviation operations, and to avoid certain land uses that would impede flight safety or increase the risk of injury or property loss on the ground. 
(q)	West Jackson Overlay District. The purpose of the West Jackson Overlay District is: to create additional aesthetic development requirements along Hwy 53, Hwy 124, Davis Street and Lewis Braselton Blvd, that will provide orderly and consistent development for the citizens. Additionally it is intended to: 
1.	To promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
2.	To improve the efficient operation of traffic around Jackson County. 
3.	To promote safe and efficient movement within the Overlay District for persons using all modes of travel—motorized vehicles, bicycles, and walking. 
4.	To create an attractive gateway that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible. 
5.	To encourage innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, open space, community design, and public amenities. 
6.	To establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvements and private property development within the Overlay District so as to unify the distinctive visual quality. 
(r)	Airport Design Overlay District. The purpose of the Airport Design Overlay District is to create additional aesthetic development requirements throughout the County Airport property. 
(s)	East Jackson Overlay District. The purpose of the West Jackson Overlay District is: to create additional aesthetic development requirements along Hwy 15 Alt, Hwy 441, Hwy 98, Hwy 334, and Hwy 326, that will provide orderly and consistent development for the citizens. Additionally it is intended to: 
1.	To promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
2.	To improve the efficient operation of traffic around Jackson County. 
3.	To promote safe and efficient movement within the Overlay District for persons using all modes of travel - motorized vehicles, bicycles, and walking. 
4.	To create an attractive gateway that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible. 
5.	To encourage innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, open space, community design, and public amenities. 
6.	To establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvements and private property development within the Overlay District so as to unify the distinctive visual quality. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1b, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-13, adopted Dec. 20, 2010, changed the title of § 206 from "Zoning Districts, purpose of each" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 207. - Uses allowed in each zoning district. 
(a)	Allowed principal and accessory uses. 
(1)	A Principal Use is the specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
(2)	An Accessory Use is a use that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use. 
(3)	Principal uses that are allowed by right or allowed only by special use approval in each zoning district are shown on the following Table 2.2. Accessory uses that are allowed in conjunction with a principal use are also shown on Table 2.2. 
(b)	Restrictions on particular uses. 
(1)	Requirements that apply to specific uses are listed in the Restrictions on Particular Uses Article of this Code. For convenience, those uses are identified by a separate symbol on the following Table 2.2 for uses that would otherwise be allowed by right. The restrictions also apply to special uses unless specifically waived or modified as a stipulation of special use approval. For those uses that have specific restrictions associated with them, a reference is given on the table to the pertinent Section in Article 3. 
(2)	Not all Sections of Article 3 which apply restrictions and conditions on or a variety of individual uses are fully annotated on the table. 
a.	Section 303. Environmentally hazardous uses. 
b.	Section 306. Separation between agricultural and residential uses. 
c.	Section 307. Standards for Single Family and Two Family Dwellings. 
d.	Section 308. Standards for Multi-family Dwellings (including townhouses). 
e.	Section 309. Standards for Manufactured Home Parks. 
f.	Section 310. Standards for Preowned Manufactured Housing. 
g.	Section 311. Timbering and forestry. 
h.	Section 338. Heavy Manufacturing. 
i.	Section 349. Sexually Oriented Adult Uses. 
(c)	Special uses. Principal uses that are special uses may be allowed subject to special use approval procedures as set forth in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code. 
(d)	Prohibited uses. Any accessory use not shown on the following Table 2.2 as allowed in a zoning district, whether by right or with approval as a special use or as a use permitted with restrictions, is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 208. - Definitions of land use categories. 
Land use categories referred to in this Development Code have the following meanings. The use of the term "property" relative to a land use category includes both developed and undeveloped properties, while the term "use" means a property that is developed, occupied or otherwise in operation under the land use category. 
(a)	Agricultural. A property used primarily for the cultivation of crops, dairying or the raising of livestock, or a vacant property zoned for such purpose. Agricultural uses are all uses listed in Table 2.2 under the category "Agricultural, Forestry, and Related Uses." 
(b)	Single- and two-family residential. A property occupied primarily by one or more single-family dwellings or duplex dwellings, or a vacant property zoned for such purpose. Single and two-family residential uses are listed in Table 2.2 under the category "Residential and Related Uses" and "Subdivision". 
(c)	Multi-family residential. A property occupied primarily by one or more residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units, or a mobile home park, or a vacant property zoned or offered for such purposes. Multi-family residential uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the category "Residential and Related Uses" and "Subdivisions". 
(d)	Commercial. A property occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the sale of goods; the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment or other commercial services; the management of a business enterprise; or the provision of temporary housing to the traveling public (such as a motel); or a vacant property zoned or offered for such purposes. Commercial uses are all uses listed in Table 2.2 under the categories "Commercial" and "Recreational". 
(e)	Industrial. A property occupied by one or more business establishment that are primarily engaged in the fabrication, manufacture or production of durable or nondurable goods, or a vacant property zoned for such purpose. Industrial uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the categories "Communications," "Industrial," "Transportation," "Utilities," "Warehousing," "Waste Management," and "Wholesale Trade". 
(f)	Public institutional use. A property occupied by a public medical complex, private or public hospital, place of religious worship or a nonprofit, charitable philanthropic organization, club or institution which uses it for a public charitable philanthropic organization. Public or community uses are all uses listed in Table 2.2 under the category "Institutional Uses." 
TABLE 2.2. PRINCIPLE AND ACCESSORY USES ALLOWED BY ZONING DISTRICT 
P: Permitted use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
PR: Permitted use by right with specific regulations. See Particular Use Restrictions in Article 3. 
SU: Special Use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within said zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood or other pertinent considerations, may be found to be compatible and approved by the Governing Body in accordance with this Unified Land Development Code. An approved special use runs with the property. 
X: Not Permitted. A use that is prohibited in a particular zoning district. 
A: Administrative Review and Approval. 

 
*Shall have the same meaning as provided for by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles , 2006 Edition (NFPA 1124). 
(Ord. No. 10-02, §§ 1b, c, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 14-003, § (1), 7-21-2014 ; Ord. No. 14-009, § (1), 8-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 15-002, §§ 2, 3, 3-16-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-006, § 1, 7-20-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 3. - RESTRICTIONS ON PARTICULAR USES 

Sec. 301. - Purpose of Article 3. 
The purpose of Article 3 is to provide land use and development regulations for specific uses that will then be applicable to sites throughout the Jackson County. Unless otherwise noted, these standards are intended to be applied within all zoning districts where the particular uses are permitted, whether by right or through special use approval. 
DIVISION I. - RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY TO ALL DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 302. - Accessory buildings, uses and structures. 
The following provisions apply to accessory uses or structures in all zoning districts where the principal use is otherwise allowed, whether by right or through special use approval. 
(a)	Relationship to a principal use. 
(1)	Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building through the attachment by a wall and roof, and other such requirements as applicable to the main building. 
(2)	No accessory use or structure shall be allowed on any lot except in relation to an existing principal use on the lot. 
(3)	Any accessory building or structure in a residential district development that exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross interior space must have the approval of the Board of Commissioners as to the location, architectural design, and size prior to commencing construction. 
(4)	An accessory use shall not occupy more than 30% of the rear yard. 
(b)	Customary accessory uses to a dwelling. 
(1)	Permitted Accessory Uses. Each of the following is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use that it serves: 
a.	Private garage. 
b.	Outdoor parking area or carport. 
c.	Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. Metal buildings over 500 square feet require a special use permit. 
d.	Guesthouse. 
e.	Television or radio antenna, or a satellite dish antenna as set forth for personal over-the-air devices under the Radio, Television and Telecommunications Section of this Article. 
f.	Children's playhouse, playground and play equipment. 
g.	Quarters for the keeping of pets (doghouse) owned by the occupants of the dwelling for noncommercial purposes. 
h.	Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, jacuzzi, tennis court, deck or patio. 
1.	Pools must be located 20 feet away from any property line. 
2.	Pools must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least 4 feet in height with a self locking gate. 
i.	Common laundry facility, rental or management office, central mail box pavilion, dumpster, designated recycling collection location, clubhouse, fitness amenities and tennis courts incidental to a multi-family dwelling or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling or development, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Must be located within the building setbacks. 
2.	Signage and advertisement for any commercial purposes shall not be visible outside the development or intended to attract off-site customers. 
j.	Noncommercial greenhouse. 
k.	Garbage pad, heating and air conditioning units. 
l.	Incidental storage is permitted provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use and is stored completely within a portion of the enclosed, principal structure permitted within the district or within permitted accessory structures. Adherence to the National Fire Protection Association Code 30 for flammable and combustible materials must be met including Chapter 4 of that code dealing with container storage and NFPA Code 101 (Life Safety Code). 
(2)	Development restrictions applicable to residential accessory uses. 
a.	Any accessory use shall be located in the side or rear yard of the lot, or between the principal building and the minimum front setback for the principal building as established by this Code. 

b.	Maximum height of 2 stories or 35 feet. 
c.	No detached accessory building may be located on the front yard of a lot. 
d.	A detached accessory building shall not be closer than 5 feet to the lot line or as required by Section 409, whichever is more restrictive. [Amended 12-19-2005] 
e.	No accessory building, structure, use, or deck shall be built upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
(c)	Customary accessory uses to a church or other place of worship. 
(1)	A church or other place of worship may have a residence for the housing of the pastor, priest, minister, rabbi, etc. 
(2)	Customary accessory uses associated with a dwelling are permitted. 
(3)	A church or other place of worship may have an accessory school with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size of 3 acres for the school in addition to the minimum lot size requirement for the church or other place of worship. 
b.	Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet. 
c.	Temporary Classrooms require a special use permit. 
(4)	A church or other place of worship may have an accessory cemetery with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size of 5 acres for cemetery in addition to the minimum lot size requirement for the church. 
b.	When abutting any residential property line, a 50-foot buffer shall be required. 
c.	Ingress/egress shall be provided. 
d.	Compliance with all State of Georgia requirements. 
(5)	Within the commercial zoning districts, a community food or housing shelter may be located in a church or other place of worship as an accessory use, provided it meets the applicable minimum standards of the Community Food and Housing Section of this Article. 
(d)	Customary accessory uses to commercial and industrial uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the commercial and industrial zoning districts 
(1)	Accessory buildings are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
b.	Reserved. 
c.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(2)	Car washes accessory to gasoline stations and convenience food stores with fuel pumps, provided the car wash is located within an enclosed building that complies with the building setbacks for a principal building. 
(3)	Heating and air conditioning units subject to the following conditions: 
a.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located in any required setback. 
b.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, heating and air conditioning units shall not be closer than 10 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
c.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on a roof of any structure in the commercial and industrial zoning districts so long as the heating and air conditioning units do not exceed the height restrictions of the zoning district in which the building is located, and they are screened from a side or front view. 
d.	Ground based air conditioning and heating units shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(4)	Incidental storage. Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, and is stored completely within a portion of the enclosed, principal structure permitted in the district or within the permitted accessory structure. Adherence to the National fire Protection Association Code 30 for flammable and combustible materials must be met including Chapter 4 of that code dealing with container storage, and NFPA Code 101 (Life Safety Code). 
(5)	Free standing parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	When abutting any residential property line, free standing parking garages shall not be located within any required building setback for a principal building. 
b.	When abutting other nonresidential districts, freestanding parking garages shall not be closer than 10 feet to any rear or side property line. 
(e)	Accessory retail uses within an office, hotel or multi-family building. Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel, hotel, or multi-family building, must be conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which such activities are accessory, and are further subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	The floor space used or to be used for such accessory uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per dwelling unit in a multi-family building. 
(2)	The floor space used or to be used for such accessory uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per room in a hotel or motel. 
(3)	The floor space used or to be used for such accessory uses shall be limited to a total of 10% of the gross floor area in an office building or institutional use. 
(4)	Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the primary use structure, except for restaurants located within an office building, hotel or motel. 
(5)	No show window, advertising, or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure except for a restaurant located within an office building, hotel or motel. 
(6)	No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. 
(7)	The following accessory uses are permitted: barber shops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning pick up and distribution stations, and other similar personal service establishments; drugstores, book stores, florists, convenience food stores, gift shops, cafeterias and restaurants, private clubs, laundry facilities for the convenience of residents, and news stands. 
(f)	Alcoholic beverages. The sale of alcoholic beverages or the serving of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to properties located within a commercial or industrial district as shown on the Future Land Use Plan map of the Jackson County Comprehensive Plan, within appropriate zoning districts where such uses are otherwise allowed under this Development Code or other ordinances of Jackson County. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 303. - Environmentally hazardous uses. 
(a)	Special use approval required. Any use that requires a federal or state permit due to the handling, storage, production or processing of bio-medical or hazardous materials, products or waste, if otherwise allowed in a zoning district, must obtain approval as a special use from the Board of Commissioners. The special use application shall include a copy of the application for the federal or state permit. 
(1)	Section 313 businesses. Any business that is required to file a Toxic Chemical Release Inventory report (Form R or Form A) under Section 313 of the Emergency Public Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA, or Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Public Law 99-499) is subject to special use approval in order to operate in Jackson County. An initial Form R or Form A must be included in the application for special use approval. 
(2)	Annual reporting required. A Section 313 Toxic Chemical Release Inventory report (Form R or Form A) shall be filed with the Planning & Development Department annually when filed with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the state. Failure to submit such report to the Planning & Development Department annually may be grounds to void County approval through reinitiation of the special use approval. 
(b)	EPCRA Section 313 businesses. Businesses that may be subject to EPCRA Section 313 are those businesses with 10 or more full-time employees that manufacture, process or use any EPCRA Section 313 toxic chemical and that may be classified under any one of the following categories. Specific determinations are made under EPA rules on a business-by-business basis. 
(1)	Mining or manufacturing facilities. Businesses involved with toxic chemicals and engaged generally in any of the following industrial classifications: 
a.	Metal mining; 
b.	Coal mining; 
c.	Food and kindred products; 
d.	Tobacco products; 
e.	Textile mill products; 
f.	Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and other similar materials; 
g.	Lumber and wood products (except furniture); 
h.	Furniture and fixtures; 
i.	Paper and allied products; 
j.	Printing, publishing and allied industries; 
k.	Chemicals and allied products; 
l.	Petroleum refining and related industries; 
m.	Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products; 
n.	Leather and leather products; 
o.	Stone, clay, glass and concrete products; 
p.	Primary metal industries; 
q.	Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment; 
r.	Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment; 
s.	Electronic and other electrical equipment and components, except computer equipment; 
t.	Transportation equipment; 
u.	Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments; photographic, medical and optical goods; watches and clocks; and 
v.	Miscellaneous manufacturing industries. 
(2)	Any facility that combusts coal or oil for the purpose of generating electricity for distribution in commerce. 
(3)	Any refuse system regulated under federal law. 
(4)	Wholesale establishments engaged in storing chemical or allied products, or petroleum terminals r bulk storage. 
(5)	Businesses primarily engaged in solvents recovery services on a contract or fee basis. 
Sec. 304. - Outdoor display areas. 
Merchandise or goods may be on display outdoors for the purpose of customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers only as follows: 
(a)	Outdoor display areas. Except as provided in Section 351, the following merchandise or goods may be located in outdoor display areas on a permanent basis (where the use is otherwise permitted): 
(1)	Motorized vehicles that are in good running condition free from exterior damage or substantial wear. 
(2)	Plant nursery items. 
(3)	Light building materials such as lumber, patio pavers and decorative stone; yard furniture such as benches, swings and bird baths; and yard maintenance materials such as fertilizer, mulch, straw and seed. 
(4)	Prefabricated wood or metal accessory utility structures, sheds, and gazebos. [Added 2-13-2006] 
a.	Such buildings must be located within or on an improved, marked display area. 
b.	All buildings erected on the property for display, sale, or lease must be placed no less than 20 feet from any side or rear property line and no less than 30 from any front property line or public right-of-way. 
(b)	Daily outdoor display. Retail goods such as books, antiques, furniture and produce may be displayed outdoors on a daily basis, provided it is brought inside at the end of each business day. 
(c)	Temporary events. All other outdoor display of merchandise or goods shall be conducted on a temporary basis associated with special sales promotions in accordance with Section 350. 
(d)	Restrictions. 
(1)	Merchandise or goods on permanent display outdoors under Section 304(a) must be located at least 20 feet from any property line. 
(2)	Any area outside of a building where merchandise or goods are displayed for customer selection or direct sale but which is permanently screened by an opaque fence or free-standing wall at least 6 feet in height or a buffer meeting the standards of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Code shall not be considered an outdoor display area. 
Sec. 305. - Outdoor storage. 
The outdoor storage of goods, material or merchandise not otherwise on display for customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers, where the use is otherwise permitted, is limited as follows: 
(a)	Outdoor storage in commercial zoning districts. 
(1)	The outdoor storage of goods, material, merchandise or vehicles not otherwise on display for customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers in any of the commercial zoning districts is prohibited, except in the HRC Highway Retail Commercial zoning district. 
(2)	In the HRC zoning district, outside storage of materials is only permitted as an accessory use and subject to the following: 
a.	Outdoor storage must be located in the rear yard and not abutting any residential district; or 
b.	The outdoor storage area must be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than 8 feet in height or a buffer meeting the standards of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Code. 
(3)	Additional restrictions apply to self service storage (mini-warehouses) under Section 348. 
(b)	Outdoor storage in the industrial zoning districts. 
(1)	Any storage use operated as a principal use or accessory use on a property zoned LI or GI shall be contained entirely within a building, or: 
a.	Shall be screened form view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than 6 feet in height and appropriately landscaped and maintained; or 
b.	Shall be screened from view by a buffer meeting the standards of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Code. 
(2)	Additional restrictions apply to salvage, junk and wrecking yards under Section 345, and to self service storage (mini-warehouses) under Section 348. 
Sec. 306. - Separation between agricultural and residential uses. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
Adequate separation must be provided between agricultural structures or operations, as enumerated in this section, and neighboring residences for any new construction, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Separation required for new construction. 
(1)	The following agricultural structures or operations, when constructed or established, shall be located no closer than 300 feet measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any existing neighboring residence: 
a.	Any active poultry house, feed lots, hog parlor, or milking parlor; 
b.	Manure and other waste storage containers, lagoons, or pits and agricultural waste impoundment sites, but not including any pastures. 
(2)	The following structures or operations, when constructed or established, shall be located no closer than 150 feet measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any existing neighboring residence: 
a.	Accessory agricultural buildings for storage or operations, maintenance or processing of non-animal products not involving the housing of animals; 
b.	Kennels and other enclosures for the housing or breeding of domestic animals; 
c.	Pet Boarding Facilities, that house domestic animals (cats and dogs) for more than 12 hours; and 
d.	A structure containing more than four stalls for horses, and any corral, pen, open air arena, dressage ring, or other similar improved or constructed riding area or facility except for any pasture. 
e.	The location of the existing residential structure or agricultural structure or operation shall be determined as of the date a building permit, grading permit, or NPDES notice of intent is filed for the new agricultural structure or operation. 
(3)	The following agricultural structures or operations, when constructed or established, shall be located at least 100 feet away from any property line: 
a.	A structure containing more than four stalls for horses. 
Separation from existing uses. 
(1)	When a new residence is to be constructed on a neighboring property in proximity to any existing agricultural structure or operation for which separation is required by this section, but the existing structure or operation does not comply with such required distance, the new residence shall be separated from such structure or operation as follows: 
a.	The new residence shall be located no closer than 300 feet measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the new residential structure to the nearest point of any existing agricultural structure as defined in subsection 306(2), and no closer than 150 feet measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the new residential structure to the nearest point of any existing agricultural structure as defined in subsection 306(2), not including fences on the exterior property line. The location of the existing agricultural structure shall be determined as of the date a residential rezoning application is filed for the property upon which the new residence is to be located or as of the date a building permit application is filed for the new residence, whichever date is earlier. 
( Ord. No. 14-009, § (2), 8-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 16-002 , § 1, 2-15-2016) 
Sec. 307. - Standards for single-family and two-family dwellings. 
All single-family and two-family dwellings, including on-site built and industrialized housing, and manufactured homes, shall meet or exceed the following requirements in order to be constructed, assembled, moved into, or relocated within Jackson County: 
(a)	Foundation. 
(1)	The structure shall be attached to a permanent foundation constructed in accordance with the Building Code, State or federal regulations, as applicable. 
(2)	Upon placement, all means of transportation, such as towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches, must be removed. 
(3)	The area beneath the ground floor of the structure shall either be a slab foundation or shall be enclosed around the exterior of the structure with a foundation wall or a nonload bearing curtain wall constructed of masonry (stone or brick), cast in place concrete or concrete block finished with stucco or similar material, at least 4 inches thick, penetrated by openings only for installed vents and access doors. 
(4)	Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home and shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Installation of Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes rules and regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commission (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.) 
(b)	Landings. At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches. 
(c)	Exterior siding. Exterior siding materials shall consist of any combination of wood, brick, stone, stucco, or similar materials; vinyl or fiber cement lap siding, or similar materials. Metal siding, corrugated metal and vinyl-covered metal siding is not permitted, except that vinyl siding may be used above heated areas. 
(d)	Roofs. 
(1)	All roof surfaces shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12 (4 inches of rise for every 12 inches of run), except that mansard and gambrel roofs must meet this requirement only for those surfaces that rise from the eaves. 
(2)	All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, standing seam (noncorrugated) metal, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(3)	Minimum roof overhang shall be 6 inches, excluding gutters, along all sides of the structure. 
(e)	Minimum square footage. Every dwelling unit shall provide a heated gross floor area of at least 1,400 square feet. Heated floor area does not include garages, unheated basements, attic storage areas and partially unenclosed decks, patios or lanais. Gross floor area comprises the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features, exclusive of areas open and unobstructed to the sky. 
(f)	Minimum width. The minimum width of the entire structure shall be greater than 16 feet. Structure width shall be measured between all parallel exterior walls, with the exception of extensions from the main structure for dormers, bay windows, entrance foyers and similar appurtenances, and extensions of no more than 5 feet for other architectural elements of the structure's design. 
(g)	Deviations from standards; where allowed. The Public Development Director, or their designee, may approve deviations from the standards contained in this Section for a single-family or two-family dwelling or a manufactured home on a case-by-case basis upon a finding that all of the following are met: 
(1)	Such deviation shall provide an adequate balance between the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the right to unfettered use of private property; and, 
(2)	Such deviation shall foster beneficial development of the County in the public interest. 
(3)	To appeal an administrative decision see Section 1303 of this code. 
(h)	Compliance with codes. The dwelling shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the Building Code as adopted by the County, or in accordance with standards established by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) for manufactured homes, or in accordance with State law and regulations for industrialized buildings, whichever apply. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 308. - Standards for multi-family dwellings (including townhouses). 
(a)	Requirements in general. 
(1)	Recreation amenity. Every townhouse or multi-family development must contain a community recreation amenity of adequate size or variety to serve the development, such as a community pool, tennis courts, tot lot, basketball courts, sidewalks, or bike trails. 
(2)	Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or at the rear of dwellings; and no off street parking space shall be more than 100 feet distance by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
(3)	Curb and Gutter is required on all internal public streets. 
(4)	All common areas not included within lots or occupied by dwelling units must be set aside for community open space or recreational amenities. No less than 20% of the gross site area must be set aside as community open space. 
(5)	All primary resource conservation areas, as defined in this Code, must be set aside under a conservation easement drawn in accordance with the Environmental Protection Article of this Development Code. 
(b)	Building arrangement. Buildings that are front face to front face or back face to back face or front face to back face shall not be less than 75 feet apart. No dwelling shall be situated as to face the rear of another dwelling structure within the development or on adjoining properties, unless differences in terrain and elevation, vegetation or landscaping would provide effective visual separation. 
(c)	Dwelling units per building. 
(1)	Townhouses: No more than 10 or fewer than 3 continuous townhouses can comprise a building. 
(2)	Other multi-family buildings: No more than 8 dwelling units per floor may be included within a building used exclusively as a multi-family dwelling. 
(3)	Lofts and mixed-use buildings: Within a master planned development or a zoning district that is allowed to have lofts (dwelling units over retail or office space) or mixed-use arrangements of commercial and residential within the same building, the minimum floor area required for the dwelling units on Table 4.5 and the building heights on Table 4.7 will control the maximum number of units allowed. 
(d)	Townhouse developments. 
(1)	Staggered front façades. Dwelling units in a building shall be staggered and of varied design, singly or in pairs, by at least 3 feet. 
(2)	Townhouse developments shall be designed to provide proper access to the rear of all dwelling units for fire fighting purposes in accordance with County Fire Code requirements. 
(3)	In a townhouse development, each townhouse shall be provided with at least 400 square feet of personal outdoor space immediately adjacent to and accessible from the unit. Such space shall be screened from view from adjacent properties with a decorative fence, trellis or lattice, wall, hedge or other landscape treatment at least 6 feet high. 
Sec. 309. - Standards for manufactured home parks. 
(a)	Manufactured home park permit required. A plan drawn to a scale of not more than 200 feet per inch submitted to the Planning & Development Department for approval in order to obtain a manufactured home park permit. 
(b)	Restrictions. 
(1)	The minimum lot area for a park is 8 acres. 
(2)	The minimum road frontage is 50 feet. 
(3)	All access roads within the park shall have a minimum easement width of 36 feet and a pavement width of 20 feet, and are required to be built to County local residential street construction standards. 
(4)	No space or manufactured home shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days. 
(5)	At least 20% of the park area must be set aside as open area for recreation purposes. 
(6)	All primary conservation resource areas, as defined in this code, shall be set aside under a conservation easement drawn in accordance with the Environmental Protection Article of this Development Code. 
(7)	All streets within the park shall be lighted with a minimum spacing of 200 feet each. 
(8)	All off-street parking areas or spaces shall be paved and shall have direct access to an interior street; no direct driveway access shall be permitted between manufactured home spaces and any exterior street. 
(9)	Minimum driveway width is 10 feet and must be paved. All manufactured home spaces must have direct access to streets within the park. 
(10)	Connection to a public water supply and a public sanitary sewer system is required for all manufactured home parks. 
(11)	The maximum number of manufactured home spaces allowed per acre is shown on Table 4.1. Manufactured homes may be placed in a clustered manner with excess area used for recreation or open space. 
(12)	All manufactured home spaces shall have a minimum area of 8,712 square feet and have a minimum of 70 feet in one direction. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(13)	A copy of the park management rules and regulations must be submitted to the Planning & Development Department for approval. The park operator will be responsible for compliance with these regulations by all tenants. Failure to abide by these regulations or any of the Jackson County Manufactured Home Park Requirements will be considered a valid reason for revoking the manufactured home park permit required to operate a manufactured home park in Jackson County. 
(14)	Manufactured housing placed within the park must meet all requirements regarding manufactured housing as outlined within this Code. 
(15)	All exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the manufactured home park shall be paved, covered with crushed stone, or protected with grass or other vegetative cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
(16)	In addition to the customary accessory uses to a dwelling allowed under Section 302(b), the following shall apply: 
a.	A manufactured home may not be used as an accessory building in the manufactured home park. 
b.	Convenience retail sales space may be provided within a building in the park, limited to no more than 25 square feet of gross floor area per manufactured home space. Outdoor display or storage of merchandise and gasoline pumps are specifically prohibited. 
Sec. 310. - Standards for pre-owned manufactured homes. 
These standards are applicable to any pre-owned manufactured home that is proposed to be moved into or relocated within the county. Mobile homes, which are defined as manufactured housing that do not conform to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act (the HUD Code), are not allowed to be moved into or relocated within the county. 
(a)	Relocations and Replacements. 
(1)	Relocations. A pre-owned manufactured home may be relocated from one site (either inside or outside the unincorporated area of the county) to another site inside the unincorporated area of the county if the manufactured home meets the provisions of Section 307 for Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(2)	Replacements. An existing manufactured home that is located within a zoning district where manufactured homes are allowed under this Development Code may be removed or placed with another manufactured home provided that the replacement unit meets all of the provisions set forth in Section 307, Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(b)	Required Inspection. 
(1)	All pre-owned manufactured homes moved into or relocated within Jackson County must bear an approval seal of either HUD or the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(2)	Any pre-owned manufactured home to be moved into or relocated within the unincorporated area of the county must pass an inspection by the Public Development Department prior to and after relocation. This inspection will cover, but not be limited to: 
a.	Sanitary facilities. 
1.	Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks or obstructions. 
2.	Both cold and hot water must be supplied. 
3.	Water heating facilities must be in safe working condition. 
b.	Exterior condition. 
1.	Every habitable room shall have at least one window that can be opened facing directly to the outdoors. 
2.	The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces. 
3.	The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
4.	Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
c.	Safety of operating systems (electrical, heating, etc.), including: 
1.	Heating facilities should operate in a safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby a heating appliance may be connected. [Amended 2/13/06] 
2.	Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than 30 BTU per house per cu. ft. of room content. 
3.	Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms. 
4.	Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
5.	Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed, wired and shall be in working condition. The home shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test(s) to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
d.	The presence of operable smoke detectors. 
e.	Interior condition. 
1.	Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be in sound condition. 
2.	Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. 
3.	The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, extensive water damage or deterioration. 
(c)	Timing and location of the required inspection. No home may be placed for occupancy until standards within this Code are met. 
(1)	For a pre-owned manufactured home being relocated from any site within the county, whether incorporated or unincorporated, the inspection shall be conducted prior to moving the home from the site. If the home has already been moved to the new site, the inspection must be conducted prior to connecting the manufactured home to a water supply, to a sanitary waste disposal system, and to permanent power. The manufactured home must be inspected again once the home is connected to the water supply, to a sanitary waste disposal system, and to permanent power. 
(2)	For a pre-owned manufactured home being moved into the county from another county or state, either: 
a.	The inspection shall be conducted by a HUD-Certified Manufactured Home Inspector and approved by the Director of Public Development prior to moving the home from the original site. The manufactured home must be inspected again once the home is connected to the water supply, to a sanitary waste disposal system, and to permanent power; or 
b.	With the owner's written approval and acceptance of all liability, the inspection may be conducted at the new home site prior to connecting the manufactured home to a water supply, to a sanitary waste disposal system, and to permanent power. The manufactured home must be inspected again once the home is connected to the water supply, to a sanitary waste disposal system, and to permanent power. If the manufactured home doesn't meet the requirements of this code the manufactured home must be removed from the property within 30 days. The owner's written approval must be accepted and approved by the County Attorney prior to moving of the manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 311. - Timbering and forestry. 
Timbering and forestry operations are allowed if the tree removal represents tree harvesting undertaken as a bona fide agricultural activity. 
(a)	Bona fide agricultural activity. [Amended 2-13-2006] The following shall be required in order to qualify tree harvesting as a bona fide agricultural activity: 
(1)	The farming activity is filing farm tax returns. 
(2)	The Jackson County Tax Commissioner has approved the property for a Preferential Agricultural Assessment or a Conservation Use Assessment. 
(3)	The property owner is a tree harvesting concern. 
(4)	A tree-harvesting permit has been submitted to the Tax Commissioner, as required by State law. 
(5)	There is a contract for delivery of the trees between the tree harvesting company and an end user, such as to a mill or wood pulp company. 
(6)	Best Management Practices required by the Georgia Forestry Commission shall be followed. This can be evidenced by a contract between the tree harvesting company and the property owner (the seller) that is consistent with the form and content recommended by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(7)	The tree harvester is currently qualified as a Master Timber Harvester by the Georgia Forestry Commission at the time of the tree harvesting. 
(b)	Restriction on development approval of recently cleared land. 
(1)	A preliminary plat for any type of subdivision or a site plan for any type of multi-family or nonresidential development shall not be approved if any portion of the property has been cleared of trees within 5 years prior to such approval request. This restriction may be waived by the Board of Commissioners upon a finding that: 
a.	The tree removal occurred as a bona fide agricultural activity; and, 
b.	A minimum basal area of at least 50 square feet per acre, distributed evenly throughout the property, was retained on the property at the time of tree removal, as certified by a qualified arborist or forester. 
(2)	There shall be no restriction if documentation of items (1) through (6) under Section 311(a) is submitted to the Director of Public Development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
DIVISION II. - RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN USES 

Sec. 312. - Accessory housing for family care. 
(a)	Purpose. An accessory manufactured home may be authorized by the Public Development Department to be placed and occupied on any residential lot zoned PCFD or A-2 where such accessory housing is needed for family care, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)	Definitions relating to family care housing. The following terms as used in this section are defined as follows: 
Family care: Watchful oversight and individual assistance with or supervision of self administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting, provided by a family or family member to a relative. 
Medical hardship: A physical or mental health condition that necessitates family care of such intensity or continuous duration that the person with the condition and the family providing the care must live in close proximity, either in the same dwelling or on the same lot. 
Primary dwelling: A habitable and occupied dwelling that exists on the property where the manufactured home is to be located. 
Relative: A person related by blood, marriage or adoption, but extending in lineage no more than two generations (grandparent or grandchild) or laterally no farther than sib-ling, niece or nephew. 
Residential lot: A lot, tract or parcel of land that is occupied by a primary dwelling and properly zoned for such use. 
(c)	Residency requirements. 
(1)	Owner must occupy the property. The owner of the residential lot on which the primary dwelling and the accessory manufactured home are located must occupy either the primary dwelling or the accessory manufactured home as their principal place of residence. 
(2)	Relationship between the person with the medical hardship and the owner. The person with the medical hardship for whom family care is needed must be the owner/ occupant or a relative of the owner/occupant of the residential lot. If the person with the medical hardship is the owner/occupant of the residential lot, he or she must be a relative of the occupant of the other dwelling on the lot. 
(d)	Locational and other requirements. 
(1)	Accessory use status. The primary dwelling must have a greater floor area than the accessory manufactured home. 
(2)	Compliance with other codes. 
a.	The residential lot on which the accessory manufactured home is to be placed and the primary dwelling must be in compliance with all rules and regulations of the county, other than restrictions on the placement of an accessory manufactured home on the lot. 
b.	If the development on the residential lot on which the accessory manufactured home is to be placed or the primary dwelling is not in compliance with all rules and regulations of the county, such nonconformity must be rectified before an accessory manufactured home for family care can be placed on the lot. 
(3)	Location on the lot. 
a.	Placement of the accessory manufactured home on the lot must conform to all relevant county codes and ordinances, including setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and separation requirements of the Building Code. 
b.	The accessory manufactured home may only be located in the rear yard behind the primary dwelling, or in the side yard away from a side street on a corner lot. 
(4)	Installation requirements. 
a.	The accessory manufactured home must be connected to a potable water supply, a sewage disposal system and electrical service in conformity with the requirements of the Jackson County Health Department and applicable Building Codes. 
b.	Placement of the accessory manufactured home must comply with anchoring, foundation and other requirements of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(e)	Process for approval. 
(1)	Confirmation of hardship and need for accessory housing. 
a.	In no case shall an accessory manufactured home for family care be allowed unless it is shown by the county health department or by other appropriate medical evidence that the person for whom family care is proposed has a bona fide medical hardship and unless it is satisfactorily shown that the dwelling on the premises does not contain sufficient facilities to accommodate the proposed family care recipient. 
b.	In addition, the application shall contain a letter or other statement from a physician showing that present facilities are inadequate and stating that a medical hardship requiring the use of a manufactured home for the health care of the relative exists. 
c.	The physician's letter or other statement must indicate that the person with the medical hardship is a patient of the physician and under their continuing care, and must be dated within the same calendar year that the request for approval is made. 
(2)	Application. Approval for an accessory manufactured home for family care can be requested at any time during the year. The request shall be filed with the county public development department on forms provided by them. The Public Development Department will handle administration of the application process. 
(3)	Standards for approval. The following standards shall be used by the public development department in considering a request for approval of an accessory manufactured home for family care: 
a.	Whether or not the person creating the need for the manufactured home has a bona fide medical hardship; 
b.	Whether or not the person creating the need for the manufactured home is a relative of the person or family that will provide the needed care, and such person or family resides on the lot upon which the manufactured home will be located as their principal place of residence; 
c.	Whether or not placement of the manufactured home will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; and 
d.	Whether or not the manufactured home does or will comply with all locational and other requirements of this Ordinance. 
(4)	Decision on application. 
a.	Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a completed application, the Department of Public Development shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application on the basis of the standards in this subsection. 
b.	If the application meets the standards, the Department shall approve the application, subject to any conditions as may be necessary to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent or nearby property. If the application fails to meet the standards, it shall be denied. 
c.	The applicant shall be notified in writing by the Department of the decision on the application. 
d.	The administrative decision by the Department on the application may be appealed pursuant to Section 1303, "Appeals of Administrative Decisions," of this Development Code. 
(f)	Compliance. 
(1)	Annual renewal of approval required. 
a.	Every approval granted for an accessory manufactured home for family care must be renewed on or prior to March 31 of every year. 
b.	A request by the property owner shall be filed with the county public development department on forms provided by them no later than March 1 of every year. 
1.	The request must be accompanied by a letter or other statement of a physician stating that a medical hardship requiring the use of a manufactured home for the health care of the relative continues to exist. 
2.	The physician's letter must indicate that the person with the medical hardship is a patient of the physician and under their continuing care, and must be dated within the same calendar year that the request for renewal is made. 
c.	Renewal shall be granted administratively upon a finding by the Public Development Department that: 
1.	The conditions warranting the original approval continue to exist; and 
2.	The lot, the primary dwelling, the manufactured home and the occupants continue to be in compliance with all requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)	Report by public development. The public development department upon request of the board of commissioners will produce a report on the applications received, approved, renewed and not renewed during the year preceding the request or as otherwise directed. 
(3)	Removal of the manufactured home. The accessory manufactured home for family care must be removed from the property within 30 days after the need for such housing no longer exists, or after the lot, the primary dwelling, the manufactured home or the occupants are no longer in compliance with all requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 15-003, § 1, 3-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 313. - Agricultural produce stand. 
Produce (fruit or vegetables) stands are subject to the following minimum standards: 
(a)	Use restrictions. 
(1)	A produce stand not greater than 1,000 square feet for the purpose of seasonal sales of products grown or produced on the premises on which it is located is allowed as an accessory use to a farm, provided that there are adequate pull off lanes and on-site, off-street parking available. 
a.	All necessary federal and state permits are obtained. 
b.	A site development plan must be submitted and approved prior to operation. 
(2)	A produce stand larger than 1,000 square feet, or the resale of imported agricultural produce, on an active farm or agricultural use may be allowed with special use approval. 
(3)	A produce stand for the purpose of seasonal sales of agricultural produce on a commercial property may be allowed as an accessory use only. 
a.	A site development plan must be submitted and approved prior to operation. 
b.	The principle use of the property must meet all rules and regulations set forth in this code. 
c.	Dates of operation must be submitted with the site development plan. 
d.	If the owner of the property is not the person operating the produce stand a letter of understanding shall be required from the owner prior to approval of the site development plan. 
(e)	The produce stand must be removed at the close of business every day. No outside display or sales are may remain overnight. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 314. - Asphalt plants and concrete plants. 
Asphalt plants, temporary batch plants and concrete plants are subject to the following minimum standards: 
(a)	Use restrictions. 
(1)	Compliance with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(2)	All necessary federal and state permits are obtained. 
(3)	No operation shall be allowed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February, and March. No operation shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays, New Years, Independence Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas Day. These restrictions shall not apply to routine maintenance and may be varied for special projects, including Department of Transportation projects and large commercial projects, with the mutual concurrence of the Director of Public Development and the County Manager. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(4)	Noise abatement and air pollution abatement plans to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)	Site requirements. 
(1)	Minimum acreage to be 5 acres unless located on the property of an active quarry. 
(2)	A 1,000-foot setback is required at the time of erection from any Residential District (as defined on Table 2.1 in Article 2), or property used for a Public or Institutional Use (as defined under Section 208(f)). Asphalt mixing shall be a sealed process. 
(c)	Modification of restrictions. The restrictions under Section 314(a) and the site requirements under Section 314(b) may be modified by the Board of Commissioners as a condition of approval of a Special Use for the plant based on competent and acceptable studies or other evidence submitted by the applicant of noise, air pollution or other impacts as appropriate to the operation proposed and modification requested. 
Sec. 315. - Automobile storage yards and wrecker services. 
Automobile storage yards and wrecker services for damaged or confiscated vehicles are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	The use shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall not less than 8 feet in height, which provides visual screening. 
(2)	No dismantling, repair, or other such activity shall be conducted unless allowed as a salvage, junk or wrecking yard and complies with the requirements of Section 345. 
(3)	Automobiles shall not be held longer than provided by state and county law. 
Sec. 316. - Automobile parts and/or accessory stores. 
A parts and/or accessory retail store is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	No outside storage or displays. 
(2)	No repairs, maintenance, and/or customization of an automobile shall be permitted in the building or on the same parcel as the Automobile Parts and/or Accessory Store. 
( Ord. No. 14-003, § (2), 7-21-2014 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-003, § (2), adopted July 21, 2014, changed the title of § 316 from "Automotive light repair" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 317. - Automobile repair, maintenance, and/or customization shops. 
An indoor repair establishment for performing automotive and small truck (under 1 ton) repairs such as general repairs, maintenance and or customization is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	No outside storage. 
(2)	An emission inspection station may be an accessory use to a light auto repair facility, provided that it is contained within a fully enclosed structure. 
(3)	A well impact and soil survey shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(4)	Establishment shall not be adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential district. 
(5)	A portion of the repair shop may contain an automobile parts retail space to not exceed 50 percent of the total establishment. 
( Ord. No. 14-003, § (3), 7-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-003, § (3), adopted July 21, 2014, changed the title of § 317 from "Automotive body, paint, interior and glass repair shops" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 318. - Bed and breakfast inns, rooming and boarding houses. 
A private, owner-occupied residence may be operated as a bed and breakfast inn if the use is subordinate and incidental to the primary residence, and an allowed rooming and boarding house must meet the following requirements: 
(a)	Use restrictions. 
(1)	Special use approval shall be required for any bed and breakfast or rooming and boarding house located within a residential zoning district. 
(2)	Food service shall be limited to breakfast only and be served exclusively to guests taking lodging in the facility. 
(3)	No food preparation or cooking for guests shall be conducted within any bedroom made available for rent. 
(4)	Individual rooms that are rented shall not contain cooking facilities. 
(5)	The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character unless the changes are approved by the Board of Commissioners as a special use. 
(6)	All bed and breakfast inns and rooming and boarding houses must meet all other applicable health and safety codes. 
(7)	The owner of the bed and breakfast inn or rooming and boarding house must reside on the property. 
(8)	One employee shall be allowed to assist the owner. 
(9)	Maximum length of stay shall not exceed 14 days for bed and breakfast inns. 
(b)	Site Restrictions. 
(1)	Must meet the minimum acreage requirements of the specific zoning district. 
(2)	No parking area for guests to be located closer than 25 feet to any residential property line. 
Sec. 319. - Boarding and breeding of animals. 
Non-domestic animal keeping, such as horses, livestock, dairy, poultry, pigs, goats, and sheep, and the operation of a kennel for the boarding or breeding of domestic animals (such as dogs or cats), may be permitted subject to the following: 
Acreage restrictions. 
1.	The keeping of non-domestic animals shall require not less than 1.5 acres. 
Spacing requirements. 
1.	See Section 306 for required spacing between certain agricultural structures or operations and residences. 
2.	For a kennel, veterinary hospital or clinic the any portion of the property used for kennel, veterinary hospital or clinic shall not be located any closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
Domestic Animal Boarding and Breeding (includes cats and dogs that are kept longer than 12 consecutive hours). 
1.	See Section 306 for required spacing between certain agricultural structures or operations and residences. 
2.	No more than four animals can be maintained as breeding stock. 
3.	A minimum of six foot tall opaque vegetation must be planted around all outdoor runs or areas where dogs will be located outside of the facility. 
4.	The entire facility must be fenced in to decrease the chance of an animal getting loose. 
5.	Outdoor runs or areas where animals will be located outside can only be in operation between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
6.	Each individual holding pin/area must be enclosed by solid partitions to help reduce noise and stimulation. 
7.	A minimum of two noise reduction building materials must be used in the construction of the building to be approved by planning staff at the time of development review. 
8.	No portion of the facility/operation shall be located closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
( Ord. No. 14-009, § (3), 8-18-2014 ) 
Sec. 320. - Car, boat and recreational vehicle dealers, sales and service facility. 
When an establishment for sales of new or used automobiles and small trucks less than one ton, boats and recreational vehicles shall meet the requirements of this Section. 
(1)	Where such an establishment is an authorized dealer of new cars, boats and recreational vehicles, a service facility may also be permitted provided such service facility meets the requirements of a general automotive repair establishment and all surfaces where vehicles are stored or displayed for sale and all parking areas shall be paved. 
(2)	Such establishments that deal in used vehicles only shall not have any service facility on the premises unless approved as a special use. 
Sec. 321. - Cemeteries, mausoleums and crematories. 
(a)	New cemeteries. Cemeteries for human or animal interment are required to meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Minimum lot size of 20 acres, except for church cemeteries that shall have at least 5 acres devoted to such use. 
(2)	All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or local street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. 
(3)	Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet when the cemetery is a principal use. 
(4)	Permanent public ingress/egress shall be provided. 
(5)	Compliance must be maintained with all requirements of the State of Georgia and the County Tax Commissioner. 
(b)	Crematories. Crematories use must meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Minimum lot size of 5 acres unless an accessory use to a cemetery. 
(2)	Not abutting any residential property line. 
(c)	Mausoleums. Mausoleums are permitted in conjunction with a cemetery provided that all requirements for the cemetery have been satisfied. 
(d)	Existing cemeteries. Any cemetery or place of burial recognized by the Jackson County Tax Commissioner as tax exempt (under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41), and any "family plot" or other burial ground discovered on the site, must be protected under the requirements of State law (O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.). State law currently defines "burial ground" and "cemetery" as follows: 
(1)	"Burial ground" means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The term shall include privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
(2)	"Cemetery" or "cemeteries" means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
Sec. 322. - Public Institutional Uses. 
Places of religious worship, a public medical complex, private or public hospital, nonprofit recreational or charitable philanthropic organization, club or institution must meet the following minimum requirements. 
(a)	Development Requirements. 
1)	Minimum site area of 2 acres. 
(2)	Structure associated with the said use to be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)	Structures associated with said use to be limited to the height restrictions applicable to the zoning district in which the use is located. 
(4)	When abutting any property occupied by a residence, a 35-foot wide buffer shall be required. 
(5)	No meeting hall or sanctuary may seat or otherwise be occupied by more than 1,000 people unless approved as a special use under the procedures of this code. 
(6)	Any public institutional use in a subdivision with recorded covenants must obtain a waiver of covenants from the HOA in accordance with the covenants requirements. 
(b)	Other Requirements. In a residential zoning district, access shall be derived directly from a major collector or arterial street, unless located within a master planned development. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-03, 1-11-2010) 
Sec. 323. - Convention center, coliseums, stadiums, arenas, and amphitheaters. 
Coliseums, stadiums, arenas, amphitheaters and convention centers (privately owned) are subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(a)	Plan approval. 
(1)	Traffic and parking plan to be approved by the County Engineer. 
(2)	Hours of operation to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(3)	Noise abatement plan to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)	Site requirements for a convention center or amphitheater. Minimum site area of 5 acres, except in an approved master planned development. 
(c)	Site Requirements for a coliseum, stadium or arena. 
(1)	Minimum site area of 10 acres. 
(2)	A minimum 1,000-foot setback from any residential district. 
Sec. 324. - Community and neighborhood recreation centers. 
(a)	Community recreation centers. Nonprofit community recreation centers, such as senior centers and YMCA/YWCAs, shall be subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	The use must be owned and operated by a nonprofit organization. 
(2)	Minimum site area of 3 acres, except for senior centers. 
(3)	Structures associated with said use to be located a minimum of 35 feet from any property line. 
(4)	Structure associated with said use to be limited to 45 feet in height. 
(5)	When abutting any residential property line a 25-foot wide buffer shall be required. 
(b)	Neighborhood recreation centers. Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities, and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
(1)	Site plans must be approved by the Department of Public Development to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this Code. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within the surrounding and adjoining residential developments. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
a.	Upon written consent of all owners of property residing within 100 feet of the site, the set back may be reduced to no less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.	The set back may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line if a structural buffer is provided along said property line that effectively provides a visual and noise screen for adjacent property to a height of 8 feet. 
(3)	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the Health Department and Building Inspector. 
(4)	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(5)	Lighting shall be established in such a way that quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, it shall be shown on the landscaping plan for the project. 
(6)	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
Sec. 325. - Community food and housing shelters. 
Charitable, nonprofit, short-term housing and/or room and board accommodations for poor, transient, or needy individuals and which shall meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)	Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of overnight guests. 
(2)	Beds must be provided for all overnight guests excluding staff and volunteer workers. 
(3)	Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 A.M. 
(4)	All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary fashion. 
(5)	Within the commercial zoning districts, a community food or housing shelter may be located in a church or other place of worship as an accessory use, provided it meets the above minimum standards of this Section. 
(6)	No shelter shall be located closer than 500 feet to the nearest single-family property line measured from the closest corner or wall of the shelter. 
Sec. 326. - Day care. 
(a)	Family day care home. Childcare for pay is allowed within each of the agricultural and residential zoning districts subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	A maximum of 6 children for whom compensation is received. 
(2)	For purposes of this section only, children who are related by blood, marriage or adoption to the childcare provided shall not be included in the calculation of the 6 children limitation, with the total maximum of no greater than 8 children at any one time. 
(3)	No off-street parking may be provided for child pick up and drop off, and all outward appearance of the day care use shall be prohibited other than normal play equipment associated with a residence. 
(4)	There shall be no employees. 
(b)	Group day care facility. Day care for up to 18 adults or children is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	A maximum of 18 adults or children for whom compensation is received. 
(2)	Outdoor play areas shall be provided in the rear or side yards for all group day care facilities and shall be enclosed by a solid hedge, wall or fence 6 feet high. All outdoor play areas shall be separated from driveways, streets and parking areas. 
(3)	Group day care facilities shall provide adequate areas for the safe drop-off and pick-up of children. These areas shall be off-street in a driveway, turnaround or parking area. 
(4)	When within or adjacent to a residential district, the facility may operate for a 14 hour period per day with outdoor activities limited to daylight hours between 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. in order to limit noise impacts to neighboring residents. 
(5)	All group day care facilities shall obtain necessary state licenses and shall be operated in conformance with all applicable state and local regulations. 
(6)	When operated as an accessory use, the group day care facility shall be located within a nonresidential building and otherwise comply with all requirements of this Subsection, above. 
(7)	A group day care facility operated as a principal use shall comply with all of the property development and performance standards for the zoning district in which it is located, and shall not be located within 300 feet of another group day care facility. 
(c)	Day care center. Day care for nineteen or more adults or children is subject to the following: 
(1)	Outdoor play areas shall be provided in the rear or side yards shall be enclosed by a solid hedge, wall or fence 6 feet high. All outdoor play areas shall be separated from driveways, streets and parking areas. 
(2)	Day care centers shall provide adequate areas for the safe drop-off and pick-up of children. These areas shall be off-street in a driveway, turnaround or parking area. 
(3)	When within or adjacent to a residential zoning district, the day care center may operate for a 14 hour period per day with outdoor activities limited to daylight hours between 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. in order to limit noise impacts to neighboring residents. 
(4)	All day care centers shall obtain necessary state licenses and shall be operated in conformance with all applicable state and local regulations. 
(5)	When operated as an accessory use, the day care center shall be located within a nonresidential building and otherwise comply with all requirements of this Subsection, above. 
(6)	A day care center operated as a principal use shall comply with all of the property development and performance standards for the zoning district in which it is located, and shall not be located within 300 feet of any other day care center or group day care facility. 
Sec. 327. - Drive-in theaters. 
The following restrictions apply: 
(1)	Lanes of at least 200 feet in length. 
(2)	The volume or concentration of traffic will not create a safety hazard or impede normal traffic flow. 
(3)	The theater site is not within 500 feet of an existing residence. 
(4)	The face of the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial, or collector street located within 2,000 feet. 
Sec. 328. - Fallout shelters. 
Fallout shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, then the portion above the ground must comply with the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the building inspector. 
(2)	If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
(3)	A fallout shelter may only be located in the side or rear yard when an accessory use. 
(4)	Fallout shelters may be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
Sec. 329. - Gasoline stations, truck stops and convenience stores with fuel pumps. 
Any use that dispenses gasoline or diesel fuel, whether as a principal or accessory use, shall comply with the requirements of this Section. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	Facilities shall not be within 100 feet of any residential property or properties containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for children or dependents. 
(2)	The site shall front at least 120 feet on a major collector or arterial street and have a minimum lot area of 1 acre. 
(3)	A vehicle assess drive shall be not more than 40 feet wide as measured at its narrowest point parallel to the street, and shall not be located closer than 10 feet to an adjoining property or 40 feet from a street intersection. 
(4)	There shall not be more than 2 driveways along a single street, which must be separated by at least 100 feet. 
(5)	All operations except for the sale of gasoline or diesel fuel shall be conducted in an enclosed building. 
(6)	No gasoline pump or canopy shall be located closer than 20 feet to any right-of-way line, or the following distance from the centerline of the following streets, whichever is greater: 
a.	U.S. or State numbered highway: as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation; 
b.	Arterial street: 90 feet from the centerline; 
c.	Major collector street: 80 feet from the centerline; 
d.	Minor collector street: 70 feet from the centerline; 
e.	Local commercial or industrial street: 60 feet from the centerline; and 
f.	Local residential street: a distance equal to the front setback required by the zoning district for a principal building. 
(7)	A solid fence or wall 6 feet high shall be erected along all property lines facing any adjacent residential area. 
(8)	There shall be no rental of trailers, hand tools, garden tools, power tools or other similar equipment as an incidental part of the operation. 
(9)	Car or truck washes on the property shall be enclosed within a building, located within a side or rear yard only, and located at least 50 feet from the property line. 
(10)	A well impact and soil survey must be approved by the Board of Commissioners prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)	Requirements for full service gasoline stations. A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation and minor services customarily incidental, are subject to the following in addition to the general requirements of this Section: 
(1)	No major automobile repairs such as engine overhaul, transmission and differential repairs, body and fender work and other repairs of a similar nature shall be performed. 
(2)	No outside storage of parts or nonoperable vehicles. 
(3)	Building shall not exceed 8,000 square feet in floor area. 
(4)	An emissions or auto inspection station may be an accessory use to a gasoline service station provided it is fully enclosed in a permanent building. 
(c)	Truck stops. Establishments that cater to the fueling needs of the trucking industry are subject to the following in addition to the general requirements of this Section: 
(1)	All uses other than the dispensing of fuel must be contained within a single principal building. Such building may contain convenience shopping space, a restaurant, TV viewing and recreation lounges, rest room facilities, showers and dormitory space, but cannot be larger than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(2)	No major repairs such as engine overhaul, transmission and differential repairs, body and fender work and other repairs of a similar nature shall be performed on the site. 
(3)	No outside storage of parts or nonoperable vehicles is permitted. 
(4)	Truck parking areas must be at least 300 feet from any residential property and separated from adjoining residential property by a 200-foot wide buffer. 
(d)	Convenience stores with fuel pumps. A convenience store with fuel pumps are subject to the following in addition to the general requirements of this Section: 
(1)	The convenience store shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
(2)	No automotive repairs may be done on site. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 330. - Golf courses. 
(a)	Minimum course standards. New golf courses shall meet United States Golf Association requirements for regulation play and must provide at least 18 holes covering a minimum course distance of 5,500 yards, except as follows: 
(1)	A golf course incorporated into a residential development or master planned development may be a regulation 9-hole course with a minimum course distance of 3,000 yards; and 
(2)	A course meeting the United States Golf Association requirements for an executive golf course (minimum course distance of 4,000 yards) may be incorporated into an office park development or master planned development. 
(b)	Lighting restrictions. Outside lighting of golf courses and their accessory uses shall be completely screened from any adjoining residential use such that no light or glare is cast on such residential use. 
(c)	Accessory uses to a golf course. The following accessory uses are permitted in association with an 18-hole regulation or executive golf course: 
(1)	Buildings used to house equipment solely for the maintenance and operation of the golf course, not to exceed 3,000 square feet. 
(2)	Country club or clubhouse, which may include: 
a.	Tennis courts and other recreational courts; 
b.	Swimming pools; and 
c.	Food service with an 18-hole regulation or executive golf course only, or with a 9-hole golf course in a master planned development. 
(3)	Putting green. 
(4)	Pro shop with an 18-hole regulation or executive golf course only. 
(5)	Cart rental and staging area; 
(6)	A driving range is allowed as an accessory use to a golf course only with special use approval. 
(d)	Use limitations. 
(1)	Two thousand square feet of gross floor area for pro shop. 
(2)	Forty thousand square feet for a clubhouse or country club with an 18-hole regulation or executive golf course. 
(3)	Ten thousand square feet for a clubhouse with a 9-hole regulation golf course. 
(4)	Buildings and structures must be set back at least 100 feet from any property line. 
(5)	Loud speakers are not allowed if adjacent to a residential zoning district or master planned development. 
Sec. 331. - Guest house. 
A detached dwelling unit that is used primarily for sleeping purposes by members of the family occupying the main building, their nonpaying guests or domestic employees must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)	Standards for guest houses. 
(1)	The guest house must be an accessory use to a dwelling already existing on the lot. 
(2)	Minimum standards. 
a.	The placement of a guest house on a lot shall not result in the violation of the lot coverage maximums applicable to the zone in which it is located. 
b.	The water supply and sanitary sewage disposal system for the lot must be certified as adequate to support the guest house in combination with the main house. 
c.	Adequate parking as outlined within this code must be provided specifically for the guest house. 
(b)	Restrictions. 
(1)	Guest houses shall be architecturally compatible with the main unit. 
(2)	No more than one guest house may be located on any lot. 
(3)	The guest house must be placed to the rear of the main house. 
(4)	The floor area of the guest house shall not exceed 50 percent of the existing living area of the principal residence. 
(5)	A guest house shall be used only by the occupants of the main residence, their nonpaying guests, or live-in domestic employees. The guest house shall not be rented or otherwise occupied separately from the main residence. 
(6)	The Public Development Director must approve professionally drawn and stamped by a professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect currently registered in the State of Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. [Amended 9-20-2004, Amended 2-13-2006] 
(7)	The Public Development Director with the Chief Building Official must approve professional drawn architectural plans of the guest house prior to the issuance of a building permit. [Amended 9-20-2004, Amended 2-13-2006] 
(8)	A Guest house in a residential district development that exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross interior space must have the approval of the Board of Commissioners at to location, architectural design, and size prior to commencing construction. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Sec. 332. - Heliports and airplane landing strips. 
Heliports and airplane landing strips are allowed subject to special use approval. A heliport or airplane landing strip shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(a)	Compliance with FAA guidelines. The development of a heliport or airplane landing strip shall be in accordance with the guidelines specified in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(b)	Takeoff and landing area. 
(1)	A heliport shall, as a minimum, have a takeoff and landing area 1½ times the overall length of the largest helicopter expected to use the facility. The surface of the area shall be grassed, paved or treated as may be required to minimize dust or blowing debris. 
(2)	The owner of a heliport shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall or hedge no less than three feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
(3)	An airplane landing strip shall, as a minimum, have a takeoff and landing area that meets FAA requirements suitable to the use of the facility. The surface of the area shall be grassed, paved or treated as may be required to minimize dust or blowing debris. 
Sec. 333. - Home occupations. 
(a)	Home occupations; defined. A home occupation is any activity carried out for profit by the resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. A home occupation is further defined as one of the following: 
(1)	Home Office: A home occupation that is limited to an office use and does not involve visits or access by the public, suppliers or customers, and does not involve the receipt, maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise at the home. 
(2)	Home Business: A home occupation that is limited to the office use of a practicing professional, an artist or a commercial representative, and may involve very limited outside employment but does not involve visits or access by clients or customers. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(b)	Home Office. 
(1)	Permitted activities. 
a.	A home office shall be limited to the personal conduct of a business within one's place of residence. There shall be no exterior indication that the business activity is taking place. 
b.	A home office is allowed as an accessory use to a residential dwelling. 
(2)	Limitations on size and location. 
a.	The floor area devoted to the home office must not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square feet (whichever is less). This limitation applies to the aggregate floor area of all areas devoted to the home office, whether located within the dwelling or in an accessory structure. 
b.	There shall be no activity or display associated with the home office outside of any building or structure. 
(3)	Activity controls. 
a.	Sales. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises. 
b.	Transfer of goods. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on the premises intended for resale or delivery to customers except by U.S. Mail or parcel service. 
c.	Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities. 
d.	Manufacturing. There shall be no manufacturing, assembly or fabrication of products on the premises conducted as an occupation or commercial venture. 
e.	Employees. There shall be no associates or employees on the premises other than other members of the family who reside on the premises. 
f.	Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall be no nonresident persons on the premises in conjunction with the home office. 
g.	Parking. There shall be no parking spaces provided or designated specifically for the home office. 
h.	Lights. There shall be no exterior lighting of the building or property that is not in character with a residential neighborhood. 
(c)	Home business. Those occupations that are customarily performed in a small area of a residence due to the low intensity nature of such uses and that are clearly incidental to the use of the residence are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Special use approval is required. The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant. 
(2)	Such occupations shall be located and conducted in such a manner that the average neighbor under normal circumstances would not be aware of their existence. 
(3)	Only persons living in the dwelling unit plus one nonresident employee shall be located on the premises. 
(4)	The building that the home business is to be located in must be an existing structure ready for occupancy and not a proposed structure. No new structures may be constructed specifically for the home business. 
(5)	No exterior alteration of the residence or accessory buildings shall be made, and no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area on the lot shall be utilized. 
(6)	No article, product, or service used or sold in connection with such activity shall be other than those normally found on the premises. 
(7)	No materials, equipment, or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that 1 business vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of less than 9,000 pounds used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a paved driveway or other paved parking area, carport, garage, or rear yard. This shall not include a wrecker, dump truck, flat bed truck, tow truck, or any truck with more than 6 wheels or more than 2 axles, or any van capable of carrying more than 15 passengers, including the driver. 
(8)	Any off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the occupation. 
(9)	There shall be no more than 5 deliveries per month for use in a home business or pick up of items produced by the occupant by commercial carrier. 
(10)	No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to a greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential occupancy. 
(11)	No mechanical equipment shall be used for such occupation except such equipment as is customary for household and hobby purposes. 
(12)	There shall be no service rendered that requires customers to come to the residence for a service or requires dropping off or pick up of people. 
(d)	Expiration of special use approval. Special use approval for a home business shall expire under the following conditions: 
(1)	Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation was issued, no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home business until he shall have been issued a new special use approval. 
(2)	Whenever the holder of such permit fails to exercise the same for a period of 6 consecutive months, unless such lapse is due to illness or military service. 
Sec. 334. - Structures containing horses, private. 
A building for the shelter and feeding of horses as an accessory use to a residential use is subject to the following: 
(1)	A structure containing horses for personal use. 
a.	A structure containing horses for personal use shall not contain more than four stalls. 
b.	All animals shall be maintained within a fully fenced area. 
(2)	Private riding stable. 
a.	A structure containing horses with five or more stalls is allowed within an equestrian oriented subdivision for the common use of all residents in the subdivision. 
b.	Structures containing horses for private riding must meet the separation requirements of section 306 of this article. 
c.	Such structures containing horses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
d.	Such structures containing horses, when constructed or established, shall be located no closer than 150 feet measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any existing neighboring residence. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 16-002 , § 1, 2-15-2016) 
Sec. 335. - Junked vehicles. 
(a)	Restrictions. 
(1)	Any vehicle, which is inoperable and in a state of disrepair or abandonment, shall be classified as junked. No junked vehicle shall be allowed in Jackson County except in a junkyard or automobile wrecking yard. The following shall be specifically prohibited: 
a.	A junked vehicle within the public right-of-way; 
b.	Burning junk vehicles; 
c.	On private property that contribute to blight and depreciation of neighborhoods; 
d.	Junk vehicles intended for repair not within the confines of a repair garage; or 
e.	Junk vehicles determined to be health hazards by the Jackson County Department of Health. 
(b)	Enforcement. 
(1)	All individuals who own junk vehicles upon their lots, plots, or premises shall have 90 days to comply with this code from the date of its enactment. 
(2)	Vehicles not removed within 90 days shall be impounded or disposed of in accordance with Georgia Code Annotated, Title 23, and Sections 3301, 3302 and 3303. 
Sec. 336. - Livestock Sales. 
(1)	Livestock sales pavilions or auction facilities, including show rings or other areas for the display, exhibition, training or sale of livestock, shall not have any animal quarters located closer than 300 feet from the property line. 
(2)	Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for livestock trailers, recreation vehicles, etc., associated with the proposed use, in addition to the minimum requirements of the zoning district. 
Sec. 337. - Manufacturing and fabrication as an accessory use. 
If undertaken as an accessory use to a retail use allowed by right, such as a jewelry store or pottery, the manufacturing or fabrication activity may occupy no more than 25% of the gross floor area or 1,000 square feet (whichever is less). All products manufactured or fabricated on the premises must be sold on the premises as a retail activity. 
Sec. 338. - Manufacturing, heavy. 
A heavy manufacturing establishment includes those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable intermediate or finished products, or the use of acids or caustic chemicals, or the production of unusually loud noise, and is subject to the following: 
(1)	Such uses shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any residential property line. 
(2)	Manufacturing that will generate bio-medical, hazardous or liquid waste or air pollutants from the manufacturing process shall comply with relevant standards established by the state and federal governments, and acquire and keep current all necessary state and federal permits. Such a use requires special use approval by the County. 
(3)	Such use shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(4)	Incidental, on-site sale of manufactured products is permitted. 
Sec. 339. - Night watchman residence. 
A permanent night watchman residence may be developed as an accessory use to a nonresidential use for the exclusive occupancy of personnel employed for the security of the principal use subject to the following standards: 
(a)	Need. The principal use must be deemed by the Public Development Director as one requiring full-time security or 24-hour on-site management. Such uses include but are not limited to mini-warehouses, high-value warehousing or on-site storage, or outdoor storage of valuable materials or equipment. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Development restrictions. 
(1)	The night watchman residence may consist of only one dwelling unit. 
(2)	The residence shall be a minimum of 600 square feet in floor area, and may not be a manufactured home but must comply with all other standards of Section 307 relating to single-family and two-family residences. 
(3)	The residence may be a portion of a building primarily devoted to nonresidential uses or may be a separate residential building. If it is a separate building, the location, design, and materials of the residence shall be consistent and integral with the site plan and building design for the principal use. 
(4)	Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to the parking required for the principal uses(s). 
Sec. 340. - Personal care homes. 
(a)	General restrictions. 
(1)	A personal care home of any type (family, group or congregate) in a residential zoning district shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other personal care home (of any type) in the same or any other zoning district. 
(2)	A personal care home shall not function as a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, function as a drug rehabilitation center, or function as a facility serving as an alternative to incarceration, in a residential zoning district. 
(b)	Categories of personal care homes. 
(1)	Family personal care home. A family personal care home is limited to no more than 6 persons under care. 
(2)	Group personal care home. A group personal care home is limited no more than 15 persons under care. 
(3)	Congregate personal care home. A congregate personal care home may provide care to more than 15 persons. 
(c)	Resident managers. 
(1)	The managing caregiver of a family personal care home must be the owner of the property and a full-time resident of the facility. 
(2)	The managing caregiver of a group personal care home must be a full-time resident of the facility. 
Sec. 341. - Quarries or mining operations. 
(a)	Purpose and Intent. This section is specifically intended to address the mining, extraction, crushing, and quarrying, as appropriate, of sand, rock, precious metals, and other minerals or elements removed from the earth. 
(b)	Use Permit Required. Quarries and open pit mines, and soil or sand removal or extraction operations, require special use approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
(c)	Application requirements. 
(1)	Any application for rezoning to allow a quarry, open pit mine, soil and sand removal or extraction operation must be accompanied by the following information. 
(2)	A site plan containing the following information must be a part of such application: 
a.	Equipment, roads, buildings proposed or existing. 
b.	Points of ingress and egress. 
c.	All roads adjacent to the property. 
d.	All existing and proposed buffers. 
e.	Existing lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, or other waterways. 
f.	Parking areas. 
g.	North arrow, scale of drawing and area to be excavated. 
h.	Proposed handling and storage areas or overburden, by-products and excavated material. 
(3)	An operation plan containing the following information: 
a.	Date of commencement of the operation and its expected duration. 
b.	Proposed hours and days of operation. 
c.	The description of the method of operation, including the disposition of topsoil, overburden and byproducts. 
d.	A description of the equipment to be used in the extraction process. The applicant shall provide an estimate of the potential noise and dust levels produced by the use and the placement of such equipment. 
(4)	The applicant shall submit a copy of the operations plan and all documents submitted to the State of Georgia for the purpose of obtaining a State Mining Permit including the reclamation plan which shall include a description of how the excavated land will be restored, statement of intended future use of the land, and phasing and timing estimates of reclamation and rehabilitation activities. Operations and reclamation plans, if approved, shall be considered conditions of development approval. 
(5)	A study prepared by the applicant that shall identify any state or county maintained road within or adjacent to the property, and shall state any repaving, alterations, turning lanes or other additions necessary to accommodate the potential increase of traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operations. 
(6)	The applicant shall provide a statement regarding the intended use of explosives or other hazardous materials and the methods and procedures proposed for handling, use, storage and disposal of the materials. 
(7)	The applicant shall provide a copy of the well and soil study to be completed by applicant in connection with the application submitted to the State of Georgia for a surface mining permit, which shall include all properties within 1,000 feet of the property. 
(8)	In the event the applicant is not required to obtain a bond in connection with the surface mining permit issued by the State of Georgia, the Board of Commissioners may at its discretion require a bond calculated on a specific amount per acre for the purposes of insuring proper reclamation. The Board of Commissioners shall not require a bond if the applicant is required to obtain a bond in connection with its surface mining permit. 
(9)	The applicant shall provide documentation that it has obtained a surface mining permit from the State of Georgia and the bond required in conjunction with the surface mining permit. 
(d)	Restrictions. 
(1)	No operation shall be allowed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February, and March. No operation shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. during the months of April, May, June, July, August, September and October. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays, New Years, Independence Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas Day. These restrictions shall not apply to routine maintenance and may be varied for special projects, including Department of Transportation projects and large commercial projects, with the mutual concurrence of the Director of Public Development and the County Manager. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Area being excavated for stone mining and quarrying shall be entirely closed within a barrier fence of at least 4 feet high located at least 10 feet back from the edge of any excavation and such construction and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. For other mining operations covered by this section, the excavation area shall be surrounded by earthen berms of at least 4 feet in height covered with thorny shrubs. 
(3)	Gates must be provided at all points of vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress and shall be locked when not in regular use. 
(4)	All work areas shall be sufficiently illuminated, naturally or artificially, in accordance with the form of the operation and the stated hours of operation. No direct artificial illumination resulting from the operation shall fall on any land not covered by the application. 
(5)	All equivalent sound levels at the boundaries of the property shall not exceed the limits stated in this paragraph when adjacent to residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts, or when adjacent to a Public or Institutional Use in any zoning district, existing at the time of establishment of the quarry or mining operation. 
a.	These limits for any sound lasting continuously for 1 second or more are: 60 db(a) for projects adjacent to a Residential District 1 or a Public or Institutional Use (as defined under Section 208(f)); 65 db(a) for projects adjacent to a Commercial District; and 75 db(a) for projects adjacent to an Industrial District other than HI Heavy Industrial. (Zoning districts are listed by groupings (residential, commercial, industrial) on Table 2.1 in Article 2.) 
b.	For any sound having a duration of less than one second, including impulsive sound defined as having an abrupt onset and rapid decay, the limit shall be 80 db(a) at the property line when adjacent to a residential, commercial or industrial zoning district, or when adjacent to a Public or Institutional Use in any zoning district. 
c.	These measurements are to be made in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and shall be made with a sound level meter using the (a-) weighting scale. 
(6)	Vibration levels at the boundaries of the extraction site shall not exceed a minimum peak velocity of 1.0 inches per second, steady state and 2.0 inches per second impact state. 
(7)	All gravel and pit access roads shall be maintained in accordance with state issued air quality permits. 
(8)	For quarries and open pit mines, the maximum depth of excavation shall not be below existing groundwater, except in cases where the reclamation plan indicates that a lake or lakes will be a part of the final use of the land or where such plan indicates that adequate fill from overburden is to be used to refill such excavation. No excavation shall be allowed to lower the water table of the surrounding inhabited properties to the extent there are wells with potable water within 1000 feet of the excavation area. 
(9)	Notices shall be posted at regular intervals along the outer limits of the property, which shall warn against trespassing and shall contain a statement pertaining to the use of explosives, if applicable. 
(e)	Distance requirements. 
(1)	Soil or sand removal or extraction operations. Such uses shall not be established within 500 feet of a residential use or 200 feet of any other use. 
(2)	Quarries and open pit mines. The operational and removal area of such uses shall not be established within 2,600 feet of a Residential District and within 500 feet of any other zoning district existing at the time of establishment of the quarry or mining operation. 
(f)	Modification of restrictions. The restrictions under Section 341(d) and the distance requirements under Section 341(e) may be modified by the Board of Commissioners as a condition of approval of a Special Use for the quarry or mining operation based on competent and acceptable studies or other evidence submitted by the applicant of noise, vibration or other impacts as appropriate to the operation proposed and modification requested. 
(g)	State permits. A copy of the State permit approval shall be maintained on file with the Planning & Development Department. 
Sec. 342. - Radio, television and telecommunications. 
(a)	Definitions related to telecommunications. 
Antenna [means] any device or combination of devices, whether rods, panels or dishes, designed to receive and/or transmit radio frequency signals for amateur radio or personal wireless services, including but not limited to cellular telephone, Personal Communications Services (PCS), Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR), Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio (ESMR), Private Mobile Radio (PMR) and paging. 
Tower [means] any structure designed and constructed primarily for the support of one or more antennas and including guyed, self-support (lattice) and monopole types. This term does not include Concealed Support Structures. 
Concealed Support Structure [means] any freestanding structure constructed for the primary purpose of supporting one or more antennas but designed to resemble an architectural or natural feature of the specific environment, concealing or camouflaging the presence of the antennas. The term includes but is not limited to clock towers, campaniles, water towers, silos, light poles, flagpoles, and artificial trees. 
Temporary Wireless Communication Facility [means] portable equipment without permanent foundation that is used for a limited period while a permanent facility is under construction, under repair or during a special public event or emergency. Also called a Cell-on-Wheels (COW). 
(b)	Exemptions. 
(1)	Wireless communications facilities for which a permit was issued prior to the effective date of this Code are not required to meet the standards contained herein. 
(2)	Wireless communication facilities located on properties owned by Jackson County are not subject to the requirements this section. 
(3)	Antennas and towers less than 70 feet in height, owned and operated by the holder of an Amateur Radio license issued by the Federal Communications Commission are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
(4)	Personal over-the-air devices for audio or video programming and wireless internet services are not subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(5)	Monopole towers 100 feet or less in height located within electrical sub-stations are not subject to the requirements this Section. 
(6)	Satellite ground relay station facilities are not subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(c)	Principal or accessory use. Antennas, towers and concealed support structures may be either a principal use or an accessory use and may be located on a nonconforming lot or on a lot containing a nonconforming use. The construction of a tower or Concealed Support Structure in compliance with this Section shall not be considered an expansion of a nonconforming use. 
(d)	Approval required. 
(1)	No wireless communications facility located on private property shall be constructed unless it has first been approved as determined by the following Table 3.1. 
TABLE 3.1. APPROVAL PROCESS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 

 
*On nonresidential properties only, such as churches, schools, etc. 
BP = Building Permit  AR = Administrative Review  SU = special use 
(2)	No antenna, tower or Concealed Support Structure shall be located on a lot platted or used for single-family residential purposes. 
(3)	Concealed support structures in the AR, R-1 and R-2 zoning districts shall be allowed only in conjunction with an existing nonresidential use. 
(4)	A Temporary Wireless Communication Facility may be approved by Administrative Review in any zoning district for a period not to exceed 90 days. The application shall include an explanation of the urgency of need for a temporary facility in addition to all other documentation requirements. 
(5)	In addition to the standards enumerated for Administrative Review or special use approval, the following factors shall also be considered: 
a.	Height of the proposed tower or Concealed Support Structure. 
b.	Proximity of residential uses. 
c.	Topography of the surrounding area. 
d.	Surrounding tree cover and existing vegetation. 
e.	Design of the structure with particular reference to characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
f.	Whether there exist or have been approved other suitable towers or tall structures within the geographic area required to meet the proposed service provider's engineering requirements. The lack of suitable alternatives may be demonstrated by one or more of the following: 
1.	That existing towers or tall structures are not located within the necessary geographic area. 
2.	That existing towers or tall structures are not of sufficient height to meet system engineering requirements. 
3.	That existing towers or tall structures do not have the structural capacity to support the service provider's antennas or do not have sufficient ground or interior space for related equipment. 
4.	That the proposed service provider's antennas would cause interference with antennas on existing towers or tall structures or that existing systems would cause interference with the proposed service provider's signal. 
5.	That other limiting factors, not including economic considerations, render existing towers or tall structures unsuitable. 
(6)	Any decision to deny an application to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and cite the basis on substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(e)	Height limitations and collocation requirements. 
(1)	Antennas attached to existing buildings or structures other than towers shall not increase the total height by more than 20 feet. 
(2)	Concealed support structures in any agricultural or residential district shall not exceed 70 feet in height. Concealed support structures in other districts shall not exceed 100 feet in height. Collocation for additional users may be required contingent upon the design of the structure. 
(3)	Towers located in agricultural districts shall not exceed 250 feet in height. 
(4)	Monopoles located in the AR, R-3 and MH districts shall not exceed 150 feet in height. 
(5)	Monopoles located in commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed 200 feet in height. 
(6)	Self-support (lattice) and guyed towers shall not exceed 350 feet in height. 
(7)	All towers over 100 feet in height shall have structural capacity and ground or interior space to accommodate multiple users. Towers up to 160 feet shall accommodate at least 3 users. Towers over 160 feet shall accommodate at least 5 users. 
(f)	Design criteria. 
(1)	Setbacks. 
a.	All towers shall be located no less than a distance equal to the height of the tower from any property zoned or used for single-family residential purposes. 
b.	All towers shall be located at least one-third of its height from any public right-of-way. 
c.	Setbacks shall be based on the entire lot on which the tower is located and shall not be applied to any lease area within the host parcel. 
d.	Accessory structures or anchors in conjunction with a tower shall comply with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)	Landscaping, screening and visual impact. 
a.	A minimum 10-foot wide area meeting buffer standards shall surround towers and related equipment. Landscaping and buffer areas must be under the ownership or long-term lease of the tower owner. The required buffer area may be reduced or waived by the Director of Public Development if existing natural vegetation on site provides sufficient screening from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	Antennas and related equipment attached to existing structures other than towers shall be of the same color as any feature of the structure that forms the background. 
c.	Antennas and related equipment attached to historically or architecturally significant structures or within Significant View Corridors, as established by Jackson County or state or federal law or agency, shall be concealed in a manner that matches the architectural features of the structure. 
d.	Concealed support structures shall have all related equipment screened from view by one of the following methods: 
1.	Locating all equipment in an existing building; 
2.	Locating all equipment in an underground vault; or 
3.	Locating all equipment in a new building that is of an architectural style similar to existing buildings or compatible with the specific environment. 
(3)	Lighting. Security lighting of the facility is allowed to the extent that the light source is shielded from adjacent properties. Towers shall not be lighted beyond that required by the FAA. If lighting is required on a tower located within 1 mile of a residential use, the owner shall request FAA approval of a dual-lighting system. 
(4)	Security. All towers and related equipment shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than 6 feet in height and shall be equipped with other anti-climbing devices as appropriate to prevent unauthorized access. 
(5)	Signage. Tower facilities shall have mounted in a conspicuous place, a sign of not more that 1 square foot in area, identifying the facility's owner and providing a means of contact in the event of an emergency. All other signs and any form of advertising are prohibited. 
(6)	Compliance. All towers, concealed support structures, antennas and related equipment shall comply with all building, electrical and other codes currently in force, the applicable standards of the Electronic Industries Association and the applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration. 
(g)	Application requirements. 
(1)	Administrative Review. Applicants shall submit the following documentation for Administrative Review: 
a.	A written statement of commitment to use the proposed site from at least one federally-licensed wireless service provider. 
b.	Narrative and graphic materials, such as signal propagation plots, prepared by a radio frequency engineer clearly explaining and illustrating the proposed service provider's need for the new antenna installation. In documenting need, the applicant will address existing towers and tall structures located within 1 mile of the proposed location, the reasons why collocation on an existing tower is not feasible, the required antenna height and alternate locations as may be appropriate. 
c.	For towers or concealed support structures, a report from a qualified independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia documenting the following: 
1.	The location of the facility by longitude and latitude and Georgia State Plane Coordinate System, ground elevation and total height. 
2.	Total anticipated capacity of the tower or Concealed Support Structure, including assumptions as to number and type of antennas supported. 
3.	Evidence of the structural integrity of the structure with respect to wind and ice loading. 
4.	Design characteristics that indicate the limits of falling debris in the event of catastrophic structural failure. 
d.	Architectural renderings or simulated photographs of all proposed structure(s) in context with particular attention to views from public streets or residential uses. 
e.	Identity and current contact information of the person authorized by the applicant to answer questions from the local government or community regarding construction and operation of the facility. Include name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
(2)	Special use. All applicants for special use approval shall submit the following in addition to all documentation required by the Procedures and Permits Article for special use applications: 
a.	A written statement of commitment to use the proposed site from at least one federally-licensed wireless service provider. 
b.	Narrative and graphic materials, such as signal propagation plots, prepared by a radio frequency engineer clearly explaining and illustrating the proposed service provider's need for the new antenna installation. In documenting need, the applicant will address the proposed site's relationship to the existing antenna network, existing towers and tall structures located within 1 mile of the proposed location, the reasons why collocation on an existing tower is not feasible, the required antenna height and alternate locations as may be appropriate. 
c.	Architectural renderings or simulated photographs of all proposed structure(s) in their physical environment with particular attention to views from public streets or residential uses. 
d.	For towers or concealed support structures, a report from a qualified independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia documenting the following: 
1.	The location of the facility by longitude and latitude and Georgia State Plane Coordinate System, ground elevation and total height. 
2.	Total anticipated capacity of the tower or concealed support structure, including assumptions as to number and type of antennas supported. 
3.	Evidence of the structural integrity of the structure with respect to wind and ice loadings. 
4.	Design characteristics that indicate the limits of falling debris in the event of catastrophic structural failure. 
e.	A scale drawing of the site and area that indicates distances to the nearest residential uses. 
f.	A map that illustrates the proposed tower location with respect to the nearest airport. 
g.	A determination by the FAA regarding hazards to air navigation. 
h.	Identity and current contact information of the person authorized by the applicant to answer questions from the local government or community regarding construction and operation of the facility. Include name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
Sec. 343. - Recreational developments (including racetracks and dog parks). 
(a)	Development Plan Required. Recreational developments, including amusement and theme parks, racetracks, and dog parks, are required to provide a comprehensive development plan to the Department of Public Development prior to the issuance of any permits. This plan must be on a scale of not less than 1 inch to 400 feet and shall include: [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	The location and function of all buildings; 
(2)	Modification of natural landscape; 
(3)	The location and surface treatment of all roadways and parking areas; 
(4)	Overall parking, pedestrian circulation and landscape plan; and 
(5)	Details for drinking water and sanitary facilities approved by the County Health Department or state of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)	Site Requirements. 
(1)	Minimum acreage of 5 acres. 
(2)	Such use shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any school property line. 
(3)	Such use shall not be located closer than 200 feet from any residential property line. 
(4)	Remote Car Racing Track is exempt from the site requirements but must follow all zoning district site requirements. 
(c)	Outdoor commercial racing. Outdoor commercial racing of motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other motorized vehicles is subject to the following additional minimum requirements: 
(1)	Permits required. 
a.	Special use approval as provided in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code. 
b.	All necessary federal and state permits, if any. 
c.	Traffic impact study must be submitted with the application. 
(2)	Operational limitations. 
a.	A noise and air pollution abatement plan must be approved by the Board of Commissioners as part of the special use approval. 
b.	No damaged vehicles shall be stored on the site for more than 7 days. 
c.	Hours of operation to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(d)	Dog Parks. Dog Parks are for the recreational use of the pet(s) and the owner(s). The term dog park as used in the code is not intended to convey nor be interpreted as a dog racing park or other dog racing facilities, nor is it interpreted to hold the meaning of a dog kennel. Dog Parks are subject to the following additional minimum requirements: [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(1)	Minimum of 10 acres in the A-2 zoning district; minimum of 5 acres in all other zoning district where allowed. 
(2)	Have posted at the Park visible to all patrons, the Humane Society of the United State's (HSUS) recommended rules and regulations, as amended from time to time, for dog parks. 
(3)	Permits required. 
a.	Special use approval as provided in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code. 
b.	All necessary federal and state permits, if any. 
c.	Hours of operation to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 344. - Recreational vehicle and travel trailer parks. 
(a)	Restrictions. In any district where recreational vehicle parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit a layout of the park subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	No recreational vehicle or travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a county, state or federal highway, with minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet from the portion used for entrance and exit. 
(2)	No entrance shall be through a residential district, or shall it require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
(3)	The minimum lot area per park shall be 3 acres. 
(4)	Spaces may be used by recreational vehicles provided they meet any laws and ordinances of the county and shall be rented by the day or week only, with a maximum rental period of 30 days. Rental spaces shall not be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, or street. 
(5)	A certificate of approval from the Jackson County Health Department. 
(6)	Adequate outdoor lighting shall be located no more than every 200 feet along interior access roads. 
(b)	Accessory Uses. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to the operation of a recreational vehicle park are permitted as accessory uses, provided: 
(1)	Accessory uses and related parking shall be a maximum of 10% of the area of the park; 
(2)	Use is restricted to the occupants of the park; and 
(3)	No evidence of the commercial character of the accessory use shall be visible which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
Sec. 345. - Salvage, junk and wrecking yards. 
Vehicle or other salvage and wrecking yards, and junk yards, are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	The use shall be enclosed by an opaque fence (including chain link with interwoven solid strips) or wall not less than 8 feet in height, which provides visual screening; 
(2)	No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or within 300 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes; 
(3)	All burning shall be in conformance with the State of Georgia Air and Water Pollution Act; 
(4)	There shall be adequate drainage with no slope less than 5 percent in grade and shall be adequately maintained to prevent rodent and vermin infestation, and meet EPA specifications in regard to contamination; 
(5)	Junk vehicles shall not be stacked or layered as to endanger public health and welfare; 
(6)	The minimum areas for a junkyard shall be 5 acres and the maximum area shall be 25 acres; 
(7)	Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and thoroughfares; and 
(8)	The incidental sale of used parts, materials or equipment salvaged on the site shall be permitted. 
Sec. 346. - Sawmills and planing mills. 
All sawmills and machinery, including storage areas, whether permanent or temporary, must be at least 400 feet from all property lines. 
Sec. 347. - Schools, private. 
Private schools of general and special education are subject to following minimum requirements: 
(a)	Private elementary and secondary schools. 
(1)	The private school must provide a curriculum recognized by the state Board of Education as being equivalent to that offered in the public school system under state standards. 
(2)	Minimum lot size of 5 acres. 
(3)	Minimum public road frontage of 100 feet on a minor or major collector or arterial road. 
(4)	Overall parking and landscape plan for the entire site to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
(5)	Temporary mobile classrooms require a special use permit. 
(b)	Private junior colleges, four-year colleges and universities. 
(1)	The private school must be eligible for accreditation by a national educational organization recognized by the state. 
(2)	The private school must offer a curriculum and degrees equivalent to those offered in similar but public schools operated by the state Board of Regents. 
Sec. 348. - Self service storage, mini-warehouses. 
Minimum standards for the use, site development, construction, and placement of self-service storage facilities and mini-warehouses shall be as follows: 
(a)	General regulations. 
(1)	No wholesale or retail sales or any other business shall be permitted to be conducted within a storage bay. A self-service storage facility included within a commercial or industrial development shall have a minimum of 1 acre and a maximum of 5 acres devoted exclusively for such use. 
(2)	As a principal use, a self-storage facility shall not occupy a site larger than 10 acres. 
(3)	The only commercial activities permitted exclusively on the site of the self-service storage facility shall be rental of storage bays, pick-up and delivery of goods or property in dead storage, and the sale or rental of items related to moving and storage such as moving boxes, packing supplies and hand trucks. 
(4)	Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods; service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines or electrical equipment, or to conduct similar repair activities; conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind; rehearsing or practicing utilizing band instruments; conversion to an apartment or dwelling unit; or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activities on site. 
a.	Residential quarters for security purposes may be established on the site (see the Night Watchman Section of this Article). 
b.	Individual storage bays within a self-service storage facility shall not be considered a premise[s] for the purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or any other governmental permit or licenses to do business. 
c.	Except as provided, all property stored on site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals are prohibited. 
(b)	Access. A self-service storage facility shall be located on a lot that gains access from a local commercial or industrial street, a minor or major collector, or an arterial street. 
(c)	Outside storage. Open storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by private individuals for their personal use as well as truck tractors, antique cars and other vehicles, shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility provided the following conditions are met. 
(1)	Such storage shall take place only within a designated area. The area so designated shall be clearly delineated upon the site plan submitted for approval by the County. 
(2)	The storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the total buildable area of the site. 
(3)	The storage area shall be entirely screened from view from adjacent residential properties and public streets by a building or by the installation of a 6-foot high opaque wall or fence. If existing vegetation or topography provides the required screening, then this wall or fence requirement may be eliminated. 
(4)	Vehicles shall not be stored within the area set aside for minimum building setbacks. 
(5)	No vehicle maintenance, washing, or repair shall be permitted on site. Pleasure boats stored on site shall be stored upon wheeled trailers. No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on site. 
(d)	Development regulations. 
(1)	Separation between storage buildings. 
a.	If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum of 20 feet separating the individual buildings. 
b.	Buildings shall be situated or screened so that overhead access doors do not face public roads or residentially zoned property. 
(2)	Maximum bay size. The maximum size of a storage bay shall be 450 square feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height. 
a.	With the exception of the structure used for security quarters, the maximum height of a self-service storage facility shall 1 story unless the Board of Commissioners approves additional stories. 
b.	The height of the building shall not exceed 12 feet. Roof-mounted air conditioning and other equipment if utilized shall be screened from view. The combined height of the building and the parapet wall shall not exceed 15 feet. 
c.	All self-service storage facilities shall have roofs with not less than a 2:12 slope. 
(4)	Parking requirements. 
a.	Designated customer parking is not required; however, a minimum of 5 parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the facility's leasing office, if a leasing office is located on site. 
b.	Interior parking. Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisle ways adjacent to the storage bays. These aisle ways may be used for both circulation of traffic and user parking while using the storage bays. The minimum width of these aisle ways shall be as follows. 
1.	If aisle ways permit two-way traffic, minimum width shall be 24 feet. 
2.	If aisle ways permit only one-way traffic, minimum width shall be 20 feet. 
c.	Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the traffic flow patterns in the aisle ways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist at a minimum of the use of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows. In order to assure appropriate access and circulation by emergency vehicles and equipment, the Fire Department shall approve the turning radii of the aisle ways. 
(e)	Landscape requirements. In addition to the requirements of the Buffer, Landscaping and Tree Conservation Article of the Code, the following shall apply: 
(1)	A landscape strip of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided along all street frontages. 
(2)	There are no aisle ways or other vehicular access ways located in the area between the building and adjacent residential or office and institutional property lines or rights-of-way. 
(f)	Dumpsters and trash receptacles. Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be located where they are not visible from adjacent residentially-zoned properties and shall be adequately screened from view from all other adjacent properties and streets. 
Sec. 349. - Sexually oriented adult uses. 
The purpose of these standards is to regulate certain types of businesses to the end that criminal activities engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. This is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development throughout the regulation of sexually oriented establishments versus any legally protected rights of sexually oriented establishments and patrons. This is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity, which would otherwise be unlawful. The Board of Commissioners, after weighing and careful consideration, find that all other uses allowed within any zone other than LI (Light Industrial), GI (General Industrial) and HI (Heavy Industrial) zones shall exclude sexually oriented establishments unless such uses are specifically stated to include sexually oriented establishments within that zone. No general use description set out elsewhere shall be deemed or construed to include such use. 
(a)	Special use approval required. Prior to using the premises as a sexually oriented establishment, any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity must first have applied and received special use approval for the operation of any sexually oriented establishment. No use hereunder shall condone or make legal any activities there under if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of Jackson County. 
(b)	Use limitations. 
(1)	No minors shall be allowed to enter or remain within a licensed premises. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, barter, trade, give or offer to sell, exchange, barter, trade, or give, to any minor any entertainment, service, material, device, or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an sexually oriented facility. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed official or any employee of the County or employee of an elected official of the County who receives all or part of his/her salary from Jackson County, or his/her spouse or minor child(ren) to have any whole, partial, or beneficial interest as defined herein in any license or use hereunder. 
(4)	The following provisions, in addition to all others, shall apply to erotic dance and entertainment establishments. 
a.	No later than March 1 of each year, the applicant shall file a verified report with the County showing the licensee's gross receipts and all amounts paid to dancers or entertainers for the preceding 12 month period. 
b.	Applicants shall maintain and retain for a period of 2 years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers or entertainers. 
c.	All dancers and entertainers, dancing and entertainment, shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 2 feet from the next-highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
d.	No dancing or entertainment shall occur closer than 10 feet to any patron. 
e.	No dancer or entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or entertainer. 
f.	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
g.	No dancer or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
h.	All areas of the licensee's establishment shall be fully lighted at all times when patrons are present, which shall mean illumination equal to 3½ foot candles per square foot. 
(5)	No sexually oriented establishment shall be conducted, operated, or licensed if the sexually oriented activity on the interior of its premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(6)	No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except to separate offices, kitchens, rest rooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(7)	All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. Each premise[s] shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. The person in charge of the premises shall supervise this activity. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment, and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent accumulation. 
(8)	The applicant or his designee shall make sanitary inspections of the premises at least every 15 days. Each licensed premise[s] shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(9)	No premises for a sexually oriented establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business or with any place where gambling or other illegal activity is conducted or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or other dealing in, of alcoholic beverages or for any immoral purposes. 
(c)	Certain activities prohibited. 
(1)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall conduct any illegal activity in or upon the premises. 
(2)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(3)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this Section. 
(4)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(5)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation, or in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(6)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed, erect penis. 
(7)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer a male employee or any person on the premises to engage in or simulate bestiality. 
(8)	No person other than a dancer or entertainer while on any licensed premises shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view with less than a complete and opaque covering of his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, and if female, her breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(9)	No employee or person, while on licensed premises, shall or be permitted to dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such a manner as to simulate sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, or other person not employed therein. 
(10)	No person, while on licensed premises, shall, while nude or semi-nude, be permitted to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap, or body of any patron, spectator, employee, or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator, or other person. 
(11)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer the use of any areas of the premises of such establishments for sexual contract or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(12)	No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity shall permit or suffer any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces, or promotes conduct or activities prohibited by this Section. 
(13)	No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, possessed, or consumed on the premises except in full compliance with Jackson County and any applicable federal or state laws. 
(14)	No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed, or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(d)	Distance requirements for location. 
(1)	No sexually oriented establishment, business, or use shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein. 
a.	Within 1,000 feet of any residence. 
b.	Within 1,000 feet of a place of worship, school, government-owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, community club, or prison. 
c.	Within 1,000 feet of another establishment regulated or defined hereunder. 
d.	Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages other than the licensed establishment. 
(2)	Each application for special use approval hereunder for which there is no existing County license then in effect of the type for which application is being made shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½" by 11" in size showing the proposed location and the location of all customer entries in relation and distance, measured as provided in this Section, to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the above distance requirements, together with the zoning district and present uses of all such real property and the proposed location. 
(3)	After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building on the premises or customer entry locations shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirements of this Section. 
(e)	Sexually oriented establishment employees. 
(1)	Employees of sexually oriented establishments shall not be less than 21 years of age. 
(2)	No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, waiters, bouncers, bartenders, disc jockeys, and musicians, who has been convicted in this or any other county or state or in any federal court within 5 years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or crime involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been performed. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises or elsewhere, for compensation or otherwise. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair, or maintenance services for licensee. 
(3)	A permit to work in or be employed by a sexually oriented establishment, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this Section, independent contractors, such as entertainers, employed or hired by a sexually oriented establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any sexually oriented establishment. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his or her separate business license. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair, or maintenance services for licensee. 
(4)	No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed and application, paid the fee for, and obtained a work permit from the Sheriff's Department. 
(5)	Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended. The Sheriff's Department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of all licensees of a sexually oriented establishment to file with the Sheriff's Department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment on a monthly basis. 
(7)	Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(f)	Additional standards for approval of special use. With respect to the issuance, renewal, or retention of a special use approval, any right to retain or have approved an application for such, the following standards shall apply in addition to standards stated elsewhere in this Development Code. 
(1)	Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance requirements herein, the type and number of schools or number of churches or other facilities in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)	Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure would create difficulty in law enforcement supervision. 
(3)	Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(4)	Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. In addition to compliance with any other parking space requirements of this Code, a licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(5)	Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(6)	Where there is evidence that the conducting of the business has violated the law or this Section, creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated or unruly persons, alcoholic beverages illegally on the premises, or that illegal activities have occurred on or in connection with the premises or business, or causes law enforcement officers to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. 
(g)	Lighting. All premises shall be fully lighted both inside and outside, except during hours when the establishment is not open for business. Interior lighting shall be at least 3½ foot candles per square foot. 
Sec. 350. - Swap meets and outdoor markets. 
(1)	Outdoor swap meets, flea markets and craft shows are permitted with restrictions for the retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or second-hand merchandise in HRC or LI zoning districts. 
(a)	Applicants seeking a permit for an outdoor swap meet, flea market [or] craft show, in an HRC zoning district, can gain a permit as long as all codes set forth in this code are adhered to and non-permanent structures are secured within a permitted enclosed structure. 
(b)	Applicants seeking a permit for an outdoor swap meet, flea market [or] craft show, in an LI zoning district, can gain a permit as long as all codes set forth in this code are adhered to. 
(2)	Outdoor swap meets, flea markets and craft shows must leave a minimum of a 50-foot vegetative buffer. Said buffer cannot contain any tables, restrooms, parking, driveways, etc. The vegetative buffer must be left natural and if trees or vegetation is not sufficient additional vegetation must be added per Article 8 of this code. 
(3)	Indoor swap meets and farmer's markets are permitted within a fully enclosed building where otherwise allowed as a commercial use, without restriction as to hours or frequency. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-003, adopted Mar. 19, 2012, added a new § 350 and redesignated the current §§ 350—359 as §§ 351—360. 
Sec. 351. - Temporary events. 
Specialized and intermittent uses of property such as Christmas tree sales, circus and carnivals, commercial filming, live entertainment, personal property sales, religious assemblies, outdoor retail sales, street fairs, and swap meets are not to exceed 15 consecutive days and no more than three months in one year or the time period set forth in this section. 
(1)	Adequate off street parking must be provided. 
(2)	All events located within 300 feet of any residential occupied property are limited to times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. weekdays and 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekends. 
(3)	Adequate restroom facilities must be provided following state health department standards. 
(a)	Circus and/or carnival. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. The temporary structure can be set up no more than ten days prior to an event and must be removed no more than ten days after the event is completed. 
(b)	Commercial filming, limited. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location 21 or fewer consecutive days per quarter of a calendar year in residential districts or fewer than 30 days per quarter of a calendar year in nonresidential districts. 
(c)	Community fair. A festival or fair wholly within public areas owned by a local government, provided that any activity is conducted at least 200 feet from any property line; any event shall not exceed 21 days. 
(d)	Religious assemblies. Religious services conducted on a site that is not permanently occupied by a religious assembly use. 
(e)	Retail sales of seasonal items. 
(1)	Retail sales of Christmas trees permitted between Thanksgiving and the 26th day of December. 
(2)	Retail sales of pumpkins, gourds and other Halloween or fall items permitted from October 1st to October 31st. 
(f)	Yard and garage sales. Yard and garage sales shall be permitted within any agricultural or residential district. It shall not be the intention of this regulation to prohibit the occasional sale of personal belongings on one's property. 
(1)	Permit Required. 
a.	All yard sales shall require a permit, which shall be obtained from the Public Development Department by phone or personal application. This permit will contain the name and address of the applicant, and the 3-day period for which the applicant wishes to sell property and the permit number. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	No permit shall be extended for more than 72 hours in any 7-day period. 
c.	No street address may obtain a permit for more than 4 times each year. 
d.	It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain the permit and to post said permit in full view of the public at the place of the yard sale. 
e.	It shall be a violation of this regulation to sell merchandise in a yard sale or offer merchandise for sale or to display merchandise in any yard, carport, garage or house without a yard sale permit. 
(2)	Exclusions. This Section shall not regulate the private sale of major possessions such as homes and personal autos. 
(g)	Yard and garage sales. Yard and garage sales shall be permitted within any agricultural or residential district. This section shall not regulate the private sale of major possessions such as homes and personal autos. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 14-008, §§ (1)—(4), 8-18-2014 ) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 352. - Temporary offices for a development. 
In all major subdivisions, a permit may be granted for the temporary use of one of the homes, or for the parking of a manufactured home or industrialized building, to be used as a construction office or a real estate sales office for sale of the lots for new homes to be built and developed within the boundaries of the development. A temporary construction or sales office, where otherwise allowed, shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)	Temporary construction buildings. Temporary buildings used in construction work may be permitted in any zoning district and shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(b)	Temporary sales office; location. The temporary sales office shall be located on a lot within an area that has received Final Plat approval and has been recorded with the Clerk to the Superior Court. 
(c)	Temporary sales office; restrictions. 
(1)	Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the temporary sales office is located, as defined by the recorded Final Plat. 
(2)	The temporary sales office may be a manufactured home or industrialized building. 
(d)	Temporary sales office; removal. The temporary sales office shall be removed within 30 days after Certificates of Occupancy or connections to permanent power have been approved on 90 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 353. - Tenant dwellings. 
Tenant dwellings for farm workers, when located on the same tract of land as the principal residence, shall be 1 dwelling per 20 acres, in addition to the lot area required as part of this code. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 354. - Utility structures. 
Utility structures serving more than one lot, such as electric transformer stations, telephone exchanges, telephone towers, gas regulator stations, water and wastewater pumping stations, and water tanks, may be located in any zoning district as necessary to serve the public interest, provided such faculties comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Any building or structure, except a surrounding fence, shall be set back at least 30 feet from any property line. 
(2)	The facility shall be completely surrounded by a security fence at least 8 feet high. 
(3)	When located in any residential district, the facility shall be furnished with a planted buffer not less than 10 feet wide to create an effective visual screen on all sides bordering residential property. 
(4)	The facility may not be used for office space, storage space, or for the storage of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 355. - Waste handling or disposal. 
(a)	Recycling collection location. A location containing metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins, or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of pre-bagged recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass, and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pick up with no on-premise[s] sorting shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The center must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat, and sanitary fashion and shall not encompass an area larger than ½ acre. 
(2)	Such location shall be visually screened and maintained. 
(3)	All containers, bins or dumpsters and all vehicle maneuvering and parking areas (other than access driveways) shall be within the building set backs. 
(b)	Materials recovery center. The operation of material recovery center facilities may be permitted subject to special use approval on private property located in the LI and HI industrial districts subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	The facility must be set back a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residential use. 
(2)	All activities must be conducted in a fully enclosed building; no outside storage of materials. 
(3)	An opaque fence or cyclone (chain link) type fence, 6 feet high, must enclose the entire business, which shall be maintained in good condition and does not detract from the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)	Wood chipping/shredding and yard trimming composting facilities. 
(1)	Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves and grass clippings or similar vegetative materials, and not include animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics or metals, or similar materials. 
(2)	A 3 foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum 6 foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall shall be constructed around the entire perimeter of the facility. 
(3)	The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of a public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(d)	Landfills, subtitle D and construction-demolition materials. Subtitle D landfills and landfills approved for construction and demolition materials are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Special use approval required. A special use permit application shall be submitted with design plans, specifications, maintenance and operation information, including the following: 
a.	Proposed location; 
b.	Fire protection; 
c.	Drainage courses passing through or adjacent to site, wetlands and flood hazard areas; 
d.	Location of access roads; 
e.	Special drainage devices; 
f.	Number and type of equipment; 
g.	Maintenance and operation procedures; 
h.	Certificate of acceptance from Jackson County Health Department; 
i.	A copy of the completed application to be submitted for State permit approval; and 
j.	Other pertinent information necessary to indicate the development, operation, and appearance of the completed sanitary landfill disposal area. 
(2)	No person may locate or operate a disposal area for collection or disposal of putrescible waste, rendering plant waste, hatchery and poultry processing plant waste, which will likely create a nuisance; be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the ground or surface waters; or likely create other hazards to the public health of safety as may be determined by the Jackson County Health Department. 
(3)	Written approval of the Health Department shall be issued before any landfill operation begins. 
(4)	Compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and permit requirements is required on a continuing basis. Violations of state or federal requirements shall be grounds for revocation of special use approval as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(5)	No bio-medical or hazardous wastes as defined by federal and state laws shall be disposed or discharged into the landfill site. 
(6)	No garbage shall be disposed of within 2,600 feet of a public street or highway or a Residential District, or in any case within 2,600 feet of the periphery of the property-. 
(7)	The location of the sanitary landfill shall be determined by on-site testing or from reliable survey data to indicate soil conditions, water table and subsurface characteristics so as to prevent any drainage or leaching from the sanitary landfill into surface or ground waters. The landfill shall be fully lined and provided with leachate control. 
(8)	Soils of the site of any subtitle D or construction-demolition landfill shall be capable of handling the refuse, as shown in the U.S. Department of Agriculture soil survey, and the landfill shall not constitute a nuisance in the form of odors, smoke, blowing papers, stagnant water, or the breading and spreading of vermin. 
(9)	Supplemental insect and rodent control measures shall be instituted by the person responsible for the operation of the disposal area when considered necessary by the Jackson County Health Department. No animals may be permitted to feed within the disposal area. 
(10)	Dead animals shall be placed into the body of the fill, or their designated areas approved by the Jackson County Health Department upon arrival at the disposal site and covered immediately. 
(11)	A separate vehicle unloading area may be used for the landfilling of bulky materials such as tree trunks, tree stumps, oil drums, discarded furniture, appliances and automobiles, which do not contain garbage, putrescible waste or hazardous waste. 
(12)	Truck traffic routes and entrances to the facility shall be approved by the County Engineer. All weather access roads shall be provided. 
(13)	The landfill site must be accessible without traveling over residential streets. 
(14)	All subtitle D or construction-demolition landfills hereafter established or operated shall be enclosed with a fence at least 6 feet high with openings not more than those in 2 inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing materials or device. Such fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper or related refuse from blowing from the landfill onto neighboring property. 
(15)	All subtitle D or construction-demolition landfills shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the landfill is in use, and such landfill must be barricaded when closed to the public. 
(16)	Any changes in the normal drainage of the property upon which the subtitle D or construction-demolition landfill is located shall be accommodated by storm sewers as necessary to properly care for drainage: such storm sewers shall be installed at the expense of the user. 
(17)	All solid waste must be compacted. All operators of subtitle D or construction-demolition landfills must pack and cover daily all materials placed that day with at least 6 inches of earth in such a manner as to prevent fires and meet any and all other requirements of the Fire Code. All completed landfills must be covered with at least 2 feet of earth. Burning of any kind of refuse is prohibited. 
(18)	Fire Control. At least one of the following methods shall be provided to control fires: 
a.	Access to a supply of water at the sanitary landfill site. 
b.	Have access to an organized fire department which will provide service upon call; or 
c.	Maintain a stockpile of earth adjacent to the working face of the fill. 
(e)	Landfills, inert. 
(1)	A development permit may be issued in any zoning district for filling of a specific natural land depression with earth, provided that: 
a.	Such fill shall not include garage or trash, materials subject to decomposition such as tree stumps, dry waste building materials, or any materials that contain internal voids such as concrete block; and 
b.	Such facilities shall be allowed only in areas incapable of development without landfill operations. 
(2)	Inert landfills intended for the disposal of materials not subject to decomposition, are allowed in any zoning district, subject to the following: 
a.	Special use approval is granted by the Board of Commissioners (except in the Heavy Industrial District); 
b.	Such fill shall not include garbage or trash, or materials subject to decomposition such as tree stumps. 
(f)	Bury pits. 
(1)	The disposal by burial of dry waste building materials on a lot or within a development that is generated while a structure is under construction is prohibited. Such waste shall be removed from the property prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the structure. 
(2)	The disposal of domestic garbage or trash and the disposal of commercial and industrial waste products shall only be allowed in a sanitary landfill or as otherwise permitted or required by the County Health Department and in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
DIVISION III. - AIRPORT ZONE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 356. - Airport zone overlay district. 
This district provides restrictions that supplement or override provisions of the underlying zoning districts beneath the airport zones, and includes all areas shown on the map labeled as such and adopted as part of the Official Zoning Map as required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77. 
(a)	Definitions related to airport zones. 
Airport [means the] Jackson County Airport. 
Airport elevation [means] the highest point of an airports usable landing area measured in feet from sea level. 
Approach surface [means] a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in [Section] 357(a) of this Ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones [means] those zones are set forth in Section 356(b) of this Ordinance. 
Conical surface [means] a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Hazard to air navigation [means] an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height [means,] for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Heliport primary surface [means] the area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation. 
Horizontal surface [means] a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Larger than utility runway [means] a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft. 
Nonconforming use [means] any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or an amendment thereto. 
Nonprecision-instrument runway [means] a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Obstruction [means] any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 357(a) of this Ordinance. 
Precision instrument runway [means] a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Primary surface [means] a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planning hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in 356(b) of this Ordinance. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Runway [means] a defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Structure [means] an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces [means] these surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
Utility runway [means] a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway [means] a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(b)	Airport zones. In order to carry out the provisions of this Division, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Jackson County airport. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)	Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 75 feet wide and the cross wind or secondary runway which is 60 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)	Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)	Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. The inner edge of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 75 feet wide and the cross wind or secondary runway which is 60 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)	Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than ¾ mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of the approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 75 feet wide and the cross wind or secondary runway which is 60 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)	Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as ¾ mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(6)	Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(7)	Heliport approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is (reserved) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet from the primary surface. 
(8)	Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(9)	Heliport transitional zones. These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and the heliport approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(10)	Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all other from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(11)	Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 357. - Airport zone restrictions and permits. 
(a)	Airport zone height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)	Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)	Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)	Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)	Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than ¾ mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)	Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as ¾ mile nonprecision instrument approach zones: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(6)	Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence, slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(7)	Heliport approach zone: Slopes 8 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a distance of 4,000 feet along the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(8)	Transitional zones: Slope 7 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 950.6 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping 7 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping 7 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(9)	Heliport transitional zone: Slope 2 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the heliport approach zones and extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and heliport approach zones centerline. 
(10)	Horizontal zone: Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 950.6 feet above mean sea level. 
(11)	Conical zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(12)	Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this Division shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 75 feet above the surface of the land. 
(b)	Airport zone land use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Division, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Division in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(c)	Nonconforming uses. 
(1)	Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this Division shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations at the effective date of this Division, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Division, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(2)	Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Chairman, Jackson County Airport Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Jackson County Airport Authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 358. - Airport zone permits. 
(a)	Future uses. 
(1)	Except as specifically provided in this subsection, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any airport zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this Division shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with Section 357(d). 
a.	In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
b.	In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
c.	In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
(2)	Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this Division except as set forth in Section 357(a). 
(b)	Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this Division or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)	Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Director of Public Development determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this Division, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application of enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this Division. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this Division may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the fixed based operator for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the fixed base operator does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
(e)	Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Division and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the Jackson County Airport Authority at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
DIVISION IV. - PROHIBITED USES 

Sec. 359. - Designated uses not allowed. 
The following specific uses are not allowed in any zoning district in Jackson County: 
(1)	Bulk storage containers 1,000 gallons for petroleum, natural gas or other flammable gasses or liquids, other than as an accessory use to a gasoline station or truck stop. 
(2)	Leather and hide tanning and finishing, except taxidermy. 
(3)	Mobile home (pre-1976). 
(4)	Paper manufacturing other than finished stationery products. 
(5)	Petroleum and coal products manufacturing other than asphalt plants. 
(6)	Solid waste combusters or incinerators. 
(7)	Manufactured homes, convex containers, recreational vehicles (RV's), buses, boxcars, or other similar mobile units are not permitted to be used for accessory or primary storage structures. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(8)	Recreational vehicles (RV's) are not permitted to be used as temporary or permanent dwellings, including during the home construction process, unless approved by the Board of Commissioners as a temporary structure after a designated natural disaster. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
Sec. 360. - Noxious manufacturing or industrial activities not allowed. 
(a)	Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or by-products of the manufacturing process is prohibited: 
(1)	Caustic or corrosive acids. 
(2)	Chlorine or other noxious gasses. 
(3)	Explosives. 
(4)	Fertilizer or glue. 
(5)	Products involving hair or fur. 
(b)	Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following is prohibited: 
(1)	Tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy. 
(2)	Petroleum refining. 
(3)	Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast. 
(4)	Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
(5)	Wood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 350. 
DIVISION V. - ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON PARTICULAR USES. 

Sec. 371. - Solar energy system, building mounted. 
A building-mounted solar energy system shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)	Placement. 
1.	No solar energy system shall be mounted or affixed to any freestanding wall or fence. 
2.	Panels and building mounts shall be installed per manufacturer's specifications. 
3.	In residential zoning districts, a solar energy system for aesthetic reasons shall not be located on the front slope of a pitched roof of a principal residential structure unless no other location for the solar energy equipment is feasible. The county may require sun and shadow diagrams specific to the installation to ensure compliance with this provision. 
(b)	Height. Building-mounted solar panels or systems shall not exceed four feet above the height of any principal building on the site. 
(c)	Permits and code compliance. A building permit shall be required for installation of all building-mounted solar energy systems, except for flush-mounted panels. 
( Ord. No. 15-002, § 4, 3-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 372. - Solar energy system, ground mounted. 
In zoning districts where permitted, a "solar energy system, ground mounted," as defined in Section 1604, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)	Placement. 
1.	A ground-mounted solar energy system shall not be located within the required front yard of a lot. 
2.	A ground-mounted system shall not be located over a septic system, leach field area or identified reserve area unless approved by the Health Department. 
3.	If located in a floodplain or an area of known localized flooding, all panels, electrical wiring, automatic transfer switches, inverters, etc. shall be located above the base flood elevation. 
4.	Panels and ground mounts shall be installed per manufacturer's specifications. 
(b)	Maximum area coverage. For residential properties, a ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed 25 percent of the footprint of the principal building served. For non-residential properties, a solar energy system shall not exceed 50 percent of the footprint of the principal building served. 
(c)	Height. The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed the maximum building height for accessory buildings in the zoning district in which it is located, or 20 feet, whichever is less. 
(d)	Permitting. A building permit is required for any ground-mounted solar energy system and for the installation of any thermal solar energy system. 
( Ord. No. 15-002, § 4, 3-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 373. - Solar energy facility or solar farm. 
In districts where permitted (see Table 2-2), a "solar energy facility" or "solar farm," as defined in Section 1604, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)	Mounting. 
1.	Solar panels or solar arrays shall be mounted onto a pole, rack or suitable foundation, in accordance with manufacturer specifications, in order to ensure the safe operation and stability of the system. The mounting structure (fixed or tracking capable) shall be comprised of materials approved by the manufacturer, which are able to fully support the system components, in accordance with applicable building permit requirements. Electrical components of the facility shall meet applicable electrical code requirements, and all electrical wires and lines less than 100kV that are used in conjunction with the solar energy facility shall be installed underground. 
2.	Multiple mounting structures shall be spaced apart at the distance recommended by the manufacturer to ensure safety and maximum efficiency. 
(b)	Setbacks. A solar energy facility and its appurtenant components and structures shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines and 100 feet from any residence. 
(c)	Placement. 
1.	When located in agricultural zoning districts, the solar energy facility shall be located as much as possible to minimize impacts on prime agricultural soils, as mapped in the Jackson County comprehensive plan. 
2.	If located in a floodplain or an area of known localized flooding, all panels, electrical wiring, automatic transfer switches, inverters, etc. shall be located above the base flood elevation. 
3.	Components of the facility shall not be located over a septic system, leach field area or identified reserve area unless approved by the Health Department. 
(d)	Screening. The facility shall be fully screened from adjoining properties and adjacent roads using the natural topography or by installation of an evergreen buffer capable of reaching a height of six feet within three years of planting, with at least 75 percent opacity at the time of planting. 
(e)	Height. 
1.	Freestanding solar panels or solar arrays shall not exceed 25 feet in height as measured from the grade at the base of the structure to the highest point. 
2.	Mounted solar panels or solar arrays shall not exceed eight feet above the apex of the structure on which it is mounted or the maximum height for buildings in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(f)	Security. 
1.	Unless 24-hour security guards or video surveillance is provided at the installation, the solar energy facility shall be enclosed by a security fence no less than 6 feet nor greater than 8 feet in height. 
2.	Access gates and equipment cabinets must be locked when not in use. 
(g)	Noise. Inverter noise shall not exceed 40dBA, measured at the property line. 
(h)	Glare and lighting. 
1.	The solar energy system components shall be designed with an antireflective coating or at least shall not produce glare that would constitute a nuisance to occupants of neighboring properties, aircraft, or persons traveling adjacent or nearby roads. 
2.	If lighting is required, it shall be activated by motion sensors, fully shielded and downcast type where the light does not spill onto any adjacent property or into the night sky. 
(i)	Maintenance and upkeep. Systems shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The operator of the facility shall maintain the facility, including all buffer screening, in compliance with the approved plans and shall keep the facility free from weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
(j)	Site plan review and development permit. A site plan reviewed and approved by the planning division shall be required prior to issuance of a development permit. In addition to requirements for site plans generally, the site plan submission shall include the following information: The proposed location and dimensions of all solar panels, inverters, existing and proposed structures, screening, fencing, property lines, parking, access driveways and turnout locations, ancillary equipment, transmission lines, vegetation, the location of any residences on site and within 100 feet of the perimeter of the facility, the location of any proposed solar access easements, and standard drawings of solar energy system components. 
(k)	Additional submission requirements. In addition to requirements for information to be provided during the site plan review and development permitting process, the facility shall not be approved for operation until the following are submitted: 
1.	Copy of all lease agreements and solar access easements. 
2.	Where interconnection to an electric utility grid is proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence that the electrical utility provider has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected with the local electric utility grid. A copy of the approval from the local utility must also be provided before operation of an interconnected facility will be authorized. 
3.	A decommissioning plan for the anticipated service life of the facility or in the event that the facility is abandoned or has reached its life expectancy. 
4.	The county may require other studies, reports, certifications, and/or approvals be submitted by the applicant to ensure compliance with this section. 
(l)	Removal of obsolete or unused systems. All obsolete or unused systems shall be removed. Any structure or equipment associated with the solar farm that is not operated for a continuous period of one year shall be considered an obsolete or unused system and decommissioned per the approved decommission plan. 
( Ord. No. 15-002, § 4, 3-16-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 4. - LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 

Sec. 401. - Purpose of Article 4. 
This Article sets out the standards that control the size of lots, the placement of buildings and structures on a lot, and the bulk and intensity of development on a lot. 
Sec. 402. - Lot and building definitions. 
Access [means] a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Accessory Structure Setback Line [means] a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street, and an accessory structure. 
Buildable Area of Lot [means] that portion of a lot bounded by and interior to the required rear, side and front building setback lines for a principal building. 
Building [means] any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building Floor Area [means] the gross floor area of all heated spaces within a building. Heated floor area does not include garages, unheated basements, attic storage areas and partially unenclosed decks, patios or lanais. Gross floor area comprises the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features, exclusive of areas open and unobstructed to the sky. 
Building Height [means] the vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
Common Open Space. See Open Space. 
Cul-de-sac [means] a local road having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated with a paved turnaround. 
Cul-de-sac turnaround [means] a paved area terminating a cul-de-sac street, provided for the purpose of enabling vehicles to reverse direction while driving continuously in a forward but circular manner. For the purpose of this definition, the turnaround shall be considered to begin at that point where the street right-of-way begins, and continues, to widen in order to create the turnaround. 
Fence [means] an artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, wire mesh, or decorative metal erected to enclose, screen or separate portions of a lot. 
Floor Area, Building. See Building Floor Area. 
Floor Area, Gross. See Gross Floor Area. 
Gross Floor Area [means] the total area of all floors of a building, measured from the outside planes of the exterior walls. 
Lot [means] a parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
(1)	Corner Lot [means] any lot bounded by 2 streets at their intersection. 
(2)	Cul-de-sac lot [means] a lot having at least 50 percent of is lot frontage on a cul-de-sac turnaround, as measured along the street right-of-way line. The sidelines of a cul-de-sac lot must be perpendicular or radial to the street right-of-way lines in accordance with the Project Design Standards Article of this Code, and shall meet the frontage requirements of Sec. 403. 
(3)	Double-Frontage Lot (i.e., a through lot) [means] a lot bounding on 2 or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot unless said corner lot has frontage on 3 or more sides. 

(4)	Interior Lot [means] a lot having frontage on only one street. 
Lot Area [means] the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot frontage [means] the amount in linear feet of a lot line that abuts the right-of-way of a public or private street, or if authorized by this Development Code, the amount in linear feet of a lot line that abuts an access easement. 
Lot Line [means] the boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property. 
(1)	Front Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that abuts a public street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
(2)	Rear Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a public street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
(3)	Side Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a public street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 

Lot of Record [means] a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk to the Superior Court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot width [means] the distance from one sideline to the other sideline measured at the minimum front principal building setback line of the lot; provided, however that for a cul-de-sac lot, the distance shall be measured at the minimum front principal building setback line of the lot or the front line of the proposed or actual principal building located thereon, whichever is farther from the street right-of-way. 
Open Space [means] an area of land or water that is permanently set aside through dedication, designation or reservation to remain in a natural and unimproved state or that may be improved only for active or passive recreation or enjoyment. 
(1)	Common Open Space [means] land or water areas within a development project that are available to or benefit all occupants of the development on a continuing and permanent basis, such as walking trails, community centers or clubhouses, golf courses and other recreation areas, protected flood plains or wetlands, and fishing or boating lakes. Common open space does not include any streets or public rights-of-way, or yard areas or landscape areas located on private property. 
(2)	Public Open Space [means] land reserved for preservation, leisure or recreational use but dedicated in fee simple to a governing body or agency to be responsible for operation and maintenance. Public open space may not be reserved for or dedicated to the exclusive use of the residents of a particular development. 
Principal Building Setback Line [means] a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot. 

(1)	Front Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. 
(2)	Rear Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along and parallel to the full length of the rear lot line. 
(3)	Side Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along and parallel to the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 
Property or Parcel of Land. See Lot. 
Public Open Space. See Open Space. 
Setback [means] the shortest straight-line distance between a street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection there from (excluding roof overhangs of 18 inches or less), measured at 90 degrees to the street or lot line. 
Setback, Minimum [means] the shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way line or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
Structure [means] anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to buildings, driveways, parking lots, walls, fences, signs, and swimming pools. 
Structure Height [means] for all structures other than buildings, the vertical distance to the highest point of a structure, as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure. See also "Building Height." 
Yard [means] an area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
(1)	Front Yard [means] a yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(2)	Rear Yard [means] a yard situated along a rear lot line. 
(3)	Side Yard [means] a yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 

(Ord. No. 16-001 , § 2, 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 403. - Minimum lot frontage. 
(a)	Minimum lot frontage required. Every lot hereafter platted, and every principal building hereafter permitted, shall have at least 60 feet of frontage on a public street, or a private street approved by the board of commissioners per subsection 1010(f) of this Development Code, unless it meets one of the exceptions described in this section. No building permit shall be issued on any lot unless it meets the minimum lot frontage required by this section. 
(b)	Exceptions. 
(1)	A lot platted for a fee-simple townhouse unit shall have at least 20 feet of frontage on a public street, or a private street approved by the board of commissioners per subsection 1010(f) of this Development Code. 
(2)	A lot platted with frontage on a cul-de-sac shall have at least 30 feet of frontage on a public street, or a private street approved by the board of commissioners per subsection 1010(f) of this Development Code. 
(3)	Any lot recorded in the plat books of the county clerk of superior court but which does not meet the minimum lot frontage requirements of this section is a nonconforming lot and may be built upon subject to compliance with section 1405 nonconforming lots and any other applicable requirements of this Development Code. 
(4)	Any lot authorized by the director of public development pursuant to subsection 503(d)(1). 
(5)	Any lot for which a special exception variance has been granted to this section pursuant to section 1304 of this Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-001 , § 3, 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 404. - Residential density and lot area. 
Every property upon which a residential use will be located shall meet or exceed the requirements shown on Table 4.1 for the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
(1)	The maximum density shown on Table 5.1 shall limit the total number of lots in a subdivision, based on the gross area of the property. 
(2)	Unless specifically provided otherwise in Sec. 503 of this Development Code for certain minor subdivisions in the A-2 zoning district, the minimum lot size specified in Table 5.1 for the zoning district in which the lot is situated must be met by each lot in a conventional subdivision. See Article 5 for minimum lot size reductions in open space subdivisions and master planned developments. 
Table 4.1: Residential Density and Lot Area by Zoning District 

 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 405. - Nonresidential density and lot area. 
(1)	Every property upon which a commercial, industrial or institutional use will be located shall meet or exceed the requirements shown on Table 4.2 for the zoning district in which the lot is situated. 
(2)	The maximum nonresidential density figures shown on Table 4.2 are used to determine the amount of gross floor area for nonresidential uses that can be constructed on a lot. Maximum floor area is determined by multiplying the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) times the area of the lot in square feet. For instance, a 1-acre lot at 0.5 FAR could accommodate 21,780 square feet of floor area (43,560 square feet of lot area × 0.5 FAR). 
TABLE 4.2. NONRESIDENTIAL DENSITY AND LOT AREA BY ZONING DISTRICT 

 
*Floor area ration (FAR) reflects the building floor area (in square feet) allowed in all buildings on a lot per square foot of gross lot area. Multi-story buildings must not exceed the total floor area allowed for all floors collectively.  **Maximum floor area of all buildings related to a Heavy Industrial use shall not exceed 3,000 square feet, regardless of lot size. 
Sec. 406. - Minimum lot size on septic tank. 
(a)	Minimum lot size established. The minimum lot sizes shown on Tables 4.1 and 4.2 for lots with septic tanks, with or without public water, establish the minimum lot sizes on a nonresidential property and in a conventional subdivision on which the County Health Department will approve an on-site sewage management system. 
(b)	Lot size reductions. Article 5 of this Development Code allows for reduction of minimum lot sizes using on-site sewage management systems in open space subdivisions and master planned developments, subject to County Health Department approval. 
(c)	Lot size increases. The County Health Department will require larger lot sizes in individual cases based on a variety of factors, such as: 
(1)	The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: right of ways of roads, easements (such as power line or pipe line) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
(2)	Lots located in groundwater recharge areas are subject to increase. See the Groundwater Recharge Area Section of the Environmental Protection Article of this Development Code. 
(3)	The minimum land areas per dwelling shown on Table 4.1 are for the typical size home (3 or 4 Bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc. are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the County Health Department will require larger lots to assure useable soil area. 
(4)	The County Health Department may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than 5%, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
(5)	Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or nonpublic water supply system, respectively. 
(6)	There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent zoning setbacks and other space requirements must also be met. 
(7)	The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gallons per acre per day (gpad) when served by nonpublic or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally following Health Department guidelines. 
Sec. 407. - Minimum lot width. 
(a)	Minimum lot width established. 
(1)	Minimum lot width are shown on Table 4.3 based on the lot's zoning district, water supply and method of sewage disposal. 
TABLE 4.3. MINIMUM LOT WIDTH BY ZONING DISTRICT 

 
*Duplexes divided into 2 fee simple lots may reduce lot width to ½ the minimum, subject to Health Department approval. 
(2)	The minimum lot widths shown on Table 4.3 are measured at the minimum front setback line for principal buildings as required for each zoning district under Sec. 408, provided, however that for a cul-de-sac lot, the distance shall be measured at the minimum front setback line of the lot or the front line of the proposed or actual principal building located thereon, whichever is farther from the street right-of-way. 
(b)	Lot width increases. The lot width required on an individual lot may be wider than the minimum for a variety of reasons, such as: 
(1)	A corner lot or other lot with multiple frontages may require an additional width in order to provide an adequate buildable area on the lot. 
(2)	A greater lot width at the front minimum building setback line may be required in order to provide adequate lot width where the on-site sewage management system is to be installed. 
(3)	A greater lot width may result from provision of the minimum lot frontage, depending on lotting pattern, or to accommodate topographic or other physical conditions. 
Sec. 408. - Minimum setbacks; principal buildings. 
(1)	All principal buildings on a lot shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines and from the side and rear lot lines bounding the lot no less than the distances shown on Table 4.4, except as follows. 
(2)	Exception: Front setbacks, as measured from the existing centerline, shall be 140 feet along the south side and 90 feet along the north side of the County road known as "Progress Road," which runs approximately parallel to I-85 from US 441 to SR 98. These setbacks apply regardless of the zoning district requirements. 
TABLE 4.4. MINIMUM SETBACK—PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS 

 
*Setback shall be measured from the right-of-way line or from a line equal to ½ the minimum right-of-way required for the street classification, whichever is greater. See Table 10.1 in Article 10 for minimum right-of-way widths.  **See buffer requirements under Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article.  ***0 feet between dwelling units inside building/20 feet from interior side lot line/40 feet from periphery of development. Minimum 40 feet of separation between buildings required.  ****This shall apply to buildings, lift stations, transformer stations, power substations, communication exchanges, and similar type of structures.  [Amended 2-13-2006] 
Sec. 409. - Minimum setbacks; accessory buildings and structures. 
(a)	Accessory buildings. Minimum setbacks for accessory buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)	Guest House. Guest houses must be located to the rear of the main home on the lot and must meet the same setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
(2)	Night Watchman Residence. Night watchman residences shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
(3)	All Other Accessory Buildings. 
a.	Accessory buildings having a floor area of 144 square feet or less must be at least 5 feet from any property line and may not be located within any front yard (i.e., between the principal building and a street). 
b.	Accessory buildings having a floor area greater than 144 square feet must comply with the same setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district and may not be located within any front yard. 
c.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Accessory structures. Minimum setbacks for accessory structures (excluding buildings but including parking lots and swimming pools) shall be as follows: 
(1)	Fences and Free-Standing Walls. 
a.	In the all residential zoning districts, and for single-family detached developments within a master planned development, a fence or free-standing wall [2] in any front yard area must be set back from the right-of-way line by at least 3 feet. 
b.	For all nonresidential there shall be no minimum setback for fences or freestanding walls, provided that any fence or freestanding wall shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections (see the Sight Triangle provisions under the Project Design Standards Article). 
(2)	Gasoline pumps and canopies. For special setback provisions for gasoline pumps and canopies, see Gasoline Stations, Truck Stops and Convenience Stores with Fuel Pumps in Article 3, Restrictions on Certain Uses. 
(3)	Signs. For special setback provisions for signs, see the Minimum Sign Setback requirements in Article 7, Sign Regulations. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(4)	All Other Accessory Structures. Accessory structures not listed above must be at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way and at least 5 feet from any other property line (except driveways that connect to a street or adjoining property). 
(5)	[Not to encroach upon easements.] Accessory structures shall not encroach upon any easement. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Other than a retaining wall. 

Sec. 410. - Floor area provisions. 
(a)	Minimum building floor area within a dwelling unit. 
(1)	The minimum building floor area required for dwelling units in each zoning district is shown on Table 4.5. 
TABLE 4.5. RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA RESTRICTIONS 

 
*Larger building floor areas for dwelling units are required in open space subdivisions and master planned developments. See Article 5. 
(2)	Occupancy within a dwelling unit is not allowed to exceed the following number of persons, based on the amount of building floor area within the unit: 
a.	For up to 600 square feet of building floor area, no more than 2 persons. 
b.	For each person over 2, at least 125 square feet of additional building floor area shall be provided within the dwelling unit. 
(b)	Maximum floor area in commercial districts. 
(1)	The gross floor area occupied by a single business establishment in the NRC zoning district, or within any master planned development allowing neighborhood commercial uses, may not exceed the maximums shown on Table 4.6, nor may a multi-tenant commercial building exceed 100,000 square feet and may contain one grocery store and one drug or hardware store. 
TABLE 4.6. NONRESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA RESTRICTIONS 

 
* Maximum 100,000 square feet total in multi-tenant building. 
(2)	For the purpose of this Subsection, a business that contains other businesses within it occupying the same space, such as a grocery store with a branch bank or fast food restaurant inside, shall be considered a single business establishment. 
Sec. 411. - Building and structure heights. 
(a)	Building and structure heights; how measured. 
(1)	Building height. The vertical distance measured to the highest point of building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face street. 
(2)	Structure height. The vertical distance to the highest point of a structure (other than a building), as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or from the average grade directly below a projecting structure. 
(b)	Maximum building and structure heights. The maximum height of all buildings and structures in each zoning district, except as otherwise provided in this Section, shall be as shown on Table 4.7. 
TABLE 4.7. MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHTS 

 
As established as part of the zoning approval for the development, and the underlying zoning district. 
(c)	Exceptions to height restrictions. 
(1)	Exemptions. The following structures are exempt from the height limitations imposed by this Section, provided that no structure may exceed 200 feet in height from the average finished grade at its base: 
a.	Agricultural buildings such as but not limited to barns, silos, windmills, grain elevators, and other farm structures, but not including dwellings. 
b.	Cooling towers, gas holders, or other industrial structures where required as part of the manufacturing process. 
c.	Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, citizens band and ham radio antennas, utility substations, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, and TV reception antennas. 
(2)	Height limitations for fences and freestanding walls. Fences and freestanding walls (other than retaining walls) cannot be located within any public right-of-way, and may not exceed the following height restrictions: 
a.	In the PCFD, A-1, A-2, and A-3 zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
1.	A fence or freestanding wall in any front yard area may not exceed 4 feet in height. 
2.	A fence or freestanding wall in any side or rear yard area may not exceed 8 feet in height. 

b.	In the A-R, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts, and for single-family detached and duplex developments within the R-3 zoning district, the following shall apply: 
1.	A fence or freestanding wall in any front yard area may not exceed 3 feet in height, and shall not be constructed out of chain link or woven wire. 
2.	A fence or freestanding wall in any side or rear yard area may not exceed 8 feet in height. 
c.	Multi-family developments (including townhouses) within any zoning district, the following shall apply: 
1.	A fence or freestanding wall in any front yard area may not exceed 6 feet in height. 
2.	A fence or freestanding wall in any side or rear yard area may not exceed 8 feet in height. 
d.	In any commercial or industrial zoning districts, no fence or freestanding wall may exceed 8 feet in height. 
e.	In all zoning districts and developments, fences or freestanding walls shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections (see the Sight Triangle provisions under the Project Design Standards Article). 
(3)	Height limitations for radio, television and telecommunication antennas and towers. Height limitations for radio, television and telecommunication antennas and towers are contained in the Radio, Television and Telecommunications Section of Article 3. 
ARTICLE 5. - SUBDIVISIONS, MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS, AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 501. - Purpose of Article 5. 
This Article presents the different ways that land can be subdivided and developed, ranging from conventional residential and non-residential subdivisions, to residential open space subdivisions where green space and natural features are preserved by reducing lot sizes, to residential or mixed-use master planned developments which allow a wider variety of housing types in a well-planned mixed-use environment while also preserving green space and natural features. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
DIVISION I. - SUBDIVISIONS AND MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 502. - Minor and major subdivisions; defined. 
(a)	Lot Combination, Boundary Line Adjustment, and Minor subdivision. 
(1)	Lot Combination. A "lot combination" is a combination of two or more previously recorded lots into a single lot, the resulting lot must meet the zoning and other requirements of this Development Code. All requirements must be completed prior to approval of the "lot combination" by the Public Development Director. 
(2)	Boundary Line Adjustment. A "boundary line adjustment" is the modification of a common lot boundary between two previously recorded lots, such that no new lot is created and the resulting lots meet the zoning and other requirements of this Development Code. A "boundary line adjustment" requires that both properties involved must be within the same zoning district. 
(3)	Minor Subdivision. A "minor subdivision" is any division of land into lots meeting the minimum lot width and minimum lot size standards for the zoning district in which it is located, and in which no public improvements (not limited to items such as new streets (or upgrading of current roadway), storm water drainage facilities or installation of sidewalks) are to be made; or any division of land into lots which is specifically authorized pursuant to Sec. 503 of this Development Code. A "minor subdivision" as divided cannot include more than four lots (the creation of more than four lots will result in a major subdivision). 
(b)	Major subdivision. A "major subdivision" is any subdivision that does not qualify as a "minor subdivision." A major subdivision commonly involves the construction of a new street or upgrading of an existing roadway, the provision of stormwater drainage facilities, or the construction or improvement of public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 503. - Subdivision activity. 
(a)	Minor subdivision—Lot Combination. Lots proposed to be combined must be combined by way of a final plat approved by the Director of Public Development. The combination plat shall show a single lot and the total acreage; furthermore, within the combined lot, the plat shall show as a dashed line any original common lot lines being eliminated and label such dashed lane as "original lot line." The title of such a plat shall include the phrase "lot combination." 
(1)	The following information shall be placed on the plat either by the surveyor prior to Public Development Directors approval or will be noted on plat by the Public Development Director at the time of approval. 
a.	If the lots to be combined were a part of a subdivision previously approved and recorded, the combination plat title shall also reference the name of the original subdivision affected by the lot combination and lots in the original subdivision affected by the lot combination (e.g., "Combination Plat for Lots 3, 4, and 5 of Trinity Acres Subdivision"). 
b.	The combination plat shall also include the original tax map and parcel(s). 
c.	The combination plat shall also state that these lots shall now be considered as one build-able lot for both zoning and tax purposes. 
(b)	Minor Subdivision - Boundary Line Adjustment. When a boundary line requires adjustment, it may be adjusted only by way of a final plat approved by the Director of Public Development. No plat of a boundary line adjustment shall be approved unless the lots as reconfigured meet the zoning and other requirements of this Development Code. The title of such a plat shall include the phrase "boundary line adjustment." The owner of both lots shall be required to sign the boundary line adjustment plat prior to the Director's approval. Upon approval and recording of said plat, the owner of the land being sold or conveyed to the other lot owner is authorized to prepare, execute and record a deed conveying such property to the other lot owner. The boundary line adjustment plat shall show the entire boundaries of the lots affected by the boundary line adjustment and the total acreage of each lot as reconfigured. In addition, the boundary line adjustment plat shall show as a dashed line the original property line and the total acreage affected by the boundary line adjustment. 
(1)	The following information shall be placed on the plat either by the surveyor prior to Public Development Directors approval or will be noted on plat by the Public Development Director at the time of approval. 
a.	If the boundary to be adjusted pertains to lots that are a part of a subdivision previously approved and recorded, the title of the boundary line adjustment plat shall also include the lot numbers and the name of the original subdivision affected by the boundary line adjustment (e.g., "Boundary Line Adjustment for Lots 5 and 6 of Trinity Acres Subdivision"). 
b.	The combination plat shall also include the original tax map and parcel(s). 
(c)	Minor Subdivision - With PCFD, A-1, A-3, A-R, M-H, R-1, R-2, or R-3 Zoning. 
(1)	Any minor subdivision with PCFD, A-1, A-3, A-R, M-H, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning maybe split into no more than 3 additional lots or 4 lots including the original lot/tract. The following requirements must be met prior to subdividing of the original lot/tract: 
a.	Each lot must contain the minimum lot requirements per Table 4.1. 
b.	Each lot must meet the lot frontage requirements of Section 403 of this Development Code. 
c.	Each lot must front on an existing county standard paved road meeting the minimum right-of-way requirements and all other requirements of this Development Code. 
(d)	Minor Subdivision—With A-2 Zoning. 
(1)	Any large lot subdivision (in which each lot contains 8 or more acres) with A-2 zoning shall be completed by conforming to the following requirements: 
a.	All lots must meet or exceed the minimum lot size required for the A-2 zoning district. 
b.	Lots must have the minimum lot frontage on either an existing county standard road or an easement road. The easement road must be a minimum of 60 feet wide. All other requirements of this Development Code must be met in the creation of the large lot A-2 zoned subdivision. 
c.	None of the lots created under this subdivision, except for the remainder of the original tract, may be further subdivided except as a major subdivision. 
(2)	Any lot containing 8 or more acres in the A-2 zoning district, may be divided up into three lots, subject to compliance with this subsection: 
a.	Notwithstanding the minimum lot size requirement of 8 acres for the A-2 zoning district, new lots shall have a lot area of no less than 1.5 acre and meet all lot frontage requirements as specified in Section 403 of this Development Code. 
b.	This subsection shall not authorize the division of more than three lots including the original tract in any three year period, and in no event shall an original tract be subdivided in a way that results in more than six lots, including the original tract. 
c.	All lots created through this subsection shall meet the frontage requirements of Section 403 of this Development Code. The lots must front on an existing county standard paved roadway. 
d.	For the purpose of establishing required building setback lines and lot widths on lots without road frontage, an access easement boundary line shall be treated the same as a "public street right-of-way line" under this Development Code. 
e.	None of the lots created under this subdivision, except for the remainder of the original tract (as long as it meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the zoning district), may be further subdivided except as a major subdivision. 
(f)	Creation of major subdivisions. Major subdivisions fall into three categories for the purpose of development regulation: 
(1)	Conventional subdivisions, in which the maximum density allowed for the zoning district determines the maximum number of lots in the subdivision, and all of the lots, meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district as shown on Table 4.1 of Article 4. Open space outside of the lots may be created, but is not required. 
(2)	Open space subdivisions, in which the maximum density allowed for the zoning district determines the maximum number of lots in the subdivision, but the minimum lot size is reduced to a certain extent in response to a higher level of development standards and in order to create open space and recreational amenities for the residents. 
(3)	Master planned developments, in which the zoning district density limitation continues to control, but the minimum lot size is further reduced in response to a higher level of development standards and in order to create open space and recreational amenities for the residents. Depending on the zoning district in which a master planned development is located, flexibility in housing types, mixed-use projects and certain commercial uses are allowed. 
(g)	Conservation easement required. 
(1)	All primary conservation areas in a conventional subdivision, open space subdivision or master planned development that are required to be protected by the provisions of this Development Code, shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use, by a conservation easement in an open space subdivision or master planned development, or a natural resources easement for conventional subdivisions. 
(2)	Land within conservation and natural resource easements may be included within the lots in a subdivision, or ownership may be transferred to a homeowners' association or to a nonprofit conservation organization or land trust organized under Georgia law. 
(3)	See the Environmental Protection Article of this Code regarding conservation and natural resource easements. 
Summary Comparison of Major Subdivisions 

 
(Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 504. - Conventional subdivisions. 
(a)	Maximum number of lots. The maximum number of lots (or dwelling units) in a conventional subdivision for both residential and nonresidential developments shall be determined by the density allowed for the zoning district where the subdivision is located, multiplied times the gross acreage of the subdivision site. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Minimum lot size. In a conventional subdivision, the lot area per dwelling unit shown on Table 4.1 of Article 4 establishes the minimum lot size for each lot. 
(c)	Minimum lot width, setbacks. The lot width and setback requirements of Article 4 apply to each lot in a conventional subdivision. 
(d)	Open space optional. The developer may set aside open space in a conventional subdivision voluntarily, but such open space is not required by this Code. 
(e)	Recreation Amenity. If a recreation amenity is proposed for a conventional subdivision the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	All recreation amenity areas must be built during the first phase if the development has phases. 
(2)	Recreation amenity areas must be noted on all plans and plat. Note must specify type of amenity and when it will be completed. 
(3)	Not more than 50% of buildable lots will be granted building permits until the recreation amenity is completed or in the event of a phased development no more than 50% of buildable lots will be granted building permits until the recreation amenity is completed. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 2a, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 505. - Quality development standards. 
In order for an open space subdivision or master planned development to be approved, the development must meet or exceed the Quality Development Standards of this Section. 
(a)	Common open space. Acreage not utilized for residential lots, roadway access and utilities shall be placed in common open space or devoted to recreation amenities. 
(1)	A minimum percent of the gross project site area shall be reserved for common open space, as follows: no less than 20% of the total site must be set aside as open space for conservation, preservation or passive recreational use, such as walking trails and picnicking. Primary Conservation Areas and areas classified as Secondary Conservation Areas are to be given preference for inclusion in the minimum required open space. 
(2)	Land devoted to stormwater detention facilities may not be counted toward the 20% minimum unless the facility is a permanent lake or pond, and is designed and intended for recreational access and use by the occupants of the development. 
(3)	Additional common open space may be provided and may include active recreation areas for the proposed development, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, community facilities, etc. 
(4)	Required buffers on the perimeter of the property may be included in the minimum open space requirement. 
(5)	While common open space shall not be required to be contiguous, no individual portion of the 20% minimum required open space shall be less than 50 feet wide in its narrowest dimension, except as follows: 
a.	The open space area, by the very nature of its designated boundaries, is less than 50 feet in width. Examples include strips of steep slopes and "fingers" of floodplains that extend up drainage swales. 
b.	Parkways between road travel ways, which must be at least 20 feet in width in order to be counted as part of the minimum 20% requirement. 
(6)	No portion of the residential lots shall be credited toward the minimum open space requirement unless the portion is included within the conservation easement. No portion of any street right-of-way or public or private utility easement shall be credited toward the minimum open space requirements. 
(7)	The required common open space shall be platted at the same time that adjacent residential lots are platted, in whole or in phases. One hundred year flood plains and jurisdictional wetlands shall be included in the protected open space areas but only in MPD's the area of said flood plains and wetlands shall not be counted toward the percentage of required open space area. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Residential development standards. 
(1)	Minimum building floor area. 
a.	Minimum building floor area for a single-family detached dwelling shall be 1,500 square feet (with at least 1,200 square feet on the ground floor of a multi-storey building) in an open space subdivision. However, in a Master planned development the average dwelling shall not be less than 1,700 square feet. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	Minimum building floor area for two-family (duplex) dwelling units shall be 1,200 square feet per dwelling unit in an open space subdivision, and 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit in a master planned development. 
c.	Minimum building floor area for multi-family dwelling units (including town-houses) shall be as required for the R-3 Multi-Family District. 
(2)	Every residence must be connected to a public water system, except in the A-2 or A-R districts. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(3)	The subdivision may be served by a community sanitary sewer system approved by the Health Department or EPD, as applicable, and the applicable sewerage jurisdiction, provided further that the applicable sewerage jurisdiction shall own and operate the system upon its completion in accordance with the Project Design Standards Article of this Development Code. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(4)	Recreation amenity (master planned developments). 
a.	In addition to common open space, every master planned development must contain a community recreation amenity of adequate size or variety to serve the development, such as a community pool, tennis courts, active play area or basketball courts, as a part of the MPD special use approval. Such amenities may not be developed within a Primary Conservation Area; however amenity areas may be placed within other areas of the required 20% minimum open space. [Amended 2/13/06] 
b.	All recreation amenity areas must be built during the first phase if the development has phases. 
c.	Recreation amenity areas must be noted on all plans and plat. Note must specify type of amenity and when it will be completed. 
d.	Not more than 50% of buildable lots will be granted building permits until the recreation amenity is completed or in the event of a phased development no more than 50% of buildable lots will be granted building permits until the recreation amenity is completed. 
(5)	Private open space required (master planned developments). In a master planned development, every single-family or two-family dwelling on a lot smaller than 10,000 square feet, and every townhouse dwelling, shall have a minimum 400 square foot private yard or patio. 
a.	The private yard or patio shall be arranged for use by the occupants of the dwelling and located in the side or rear yard. 
b.	The private yard or patio must be enclosed by any combination of the following: a masonry wall, wood fence, trellis or lattice with a minimum height of 6 feet; or an evergreen hedge, shrubs or trees that will achieve a height of 6 feet within 3 years of planting under normal growing conditions. 
(6)	Lots within the subdivision shall be serviced with underground utilities (electric power, natural gas, telephone, TV cable. etc.). 
(7)	All dwelling units shall have front, side and rear façades (excluding soffits, fascia boards and window trim) which consist entirely of brick, stucco or stone finish, or painted wood or fiber cement lap siding (such as Hardiplank), or as otherwise approved as part of a special use approval by the Board of Commissioners. Vinyl siding may be used above heated areas. 
(8)	All single-family detached dwellings must include at least a 2-car garage. 
(c)	Nonresidential development standards. Restrictions within through-road corridors apply to all commercial and institutional uses within a master planned development (MPD). 
(1)	Through-road corridor defined. Land lying along and within 200 feet of the right-of-way of a public street or highway that adjoins or traverses a MPD and that provides for movement of through traffic (in contrast to internal local streets) shall constitute a through-road corridor. 
(2)	Any commercial property or public or community use property or portion of such property within the MPD that is located within a through-road corridor shall comply with the following special design standards: 
a.	Building setbacks. No principal or accessory building shall be located less than 50 feet from the right-of-way of a through road. This entire setback area shall be landscaped as a front landscape strip in accordance with the Buffers, Landscape and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
b.	Signage. Canopy signs are prohibited. 
c.	Landscaping. Any property or portion of a property that is located within a through-road corridor shall provide at least 20 percent of its gross land area in landscaping. Landscape areas and treatments shall be identified on the site plan for the development, subject to approval by the County. 
d.	Building materials. 
1.	The exterior walls of any building that is located within a through-road corridor and/or is visible from a through road corridor shall be of masonry and/or stucco-type-construction. These finish building materials shall be applied to all sides of the building visible from the through road. Colors and materials shall be harmonious and compatible with colors of other buildings within and immediately adjacent to the district. Material colors shall be natural, muted earth tones, gray or muted color brick, stone, and/or neutral shades of concrete. Bright or accent colors may be used with discretion where appropriate on ornamental locations on the building's exterior, but shall not be used as the primary building material color. 
2.	No buildings with metal exterior façades will be permitted within the corridor nor shall any metal façade buildings be visible from the corridor. Metal roofs, including mansard roofs, are not considered part of a façade. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 2b, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 506. - Open space subdivisions. 
Open space development provisions may be applied to any single-family detached subdivision in any zoning district. In addition to any conditions of zoning approval that may apply to a specific property, the following shall apply to all such subdivisions: 
(a)	Quality development standards. An open space subdivision must comply with the open space and residential development standards of Sec. 505 as a prerequisite for approval. 
(b)	Maximum number of lots. An open space subdivision shall not exceed the overall maximum density of dwelling units per acre allowed for the zoning district under Table 4.1 of Article 4. The maximum number of lots shall not exceed the maximum density allowed under Table 4.1 times the gross acreage of the site. 
(c)	Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size per dwelling unit shall be as shown on Table 5.1, depending on the zoning of the property, the source of water supply and method of sewage disposal: 
TABLE 5.1. MINIMUM LOT SIZE—OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS 

 
*Not applicable. All open space subdivisions must be connected to a public water system except in the A-2 and AR zoning districts. 
(d)	Minimum lot widths and setbacks. The minimum lot widths and minimum setbacks for principal buildings for lots in any open space subdivision shall be as required on Table 5.2, depending on the minimum lot size required for the open space subdivision. 
TABLE 5.2. LOT WIDTH AND PRINCIPAL BUILDING SETBACKS—OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISIONS 

 
*Per dwelling unit, except that townhouse subdivisions shall have a minimum lot width of 35 feet in R-2 and 20 feet in R-3.  **For duplexes or townhouses divided into fee simple lots, no side yard setback is required along the property line that separates the dwelling units in the building, but a 10-foot wide side yard shall be provided between the exterior of the building and a side lot line. 
(e)	Reduction of minimum lot widths and setbacks. 
(1)	Front setbacks. A front setback may be reduced administratively up to 5 feet from that required under Table 5.2, provided that the minimum sight distance requirements for streets is maintained in accordance with the Project Design Standards Article of this Code. 
(2)	Side setbacks. A side setback may be reduced administratively up to 50 percent of that required under Table 5.2, provided that the side yard on the adjacent lot is increased by an equal amount. 
(3)	Reductions through special use approval. The minimum lot width and minimum setbacks for principal buildings required under Table 5.2 for an open space subdivision may be reduced through special use approval following the procedures of the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code. 
Sec. 507. - Master planned development option (MPD). 
(a)	Quality Development Standards. A master planned development must comply with the open space, residential development standards and nonresidential development standards of Section 505 as a prerequisite for approval. 
(b)	Criteria for approval. 
(1)	Provisions are included to encourage the development of Master Planned Developments (MPDs) in appropriate locations throughout the county that allow the use of innovative techniques, such as traditional neighborhood design, resource conservation subdivisions, village concepts and mixed use development. Such master planned developments should be brought together as a compatible and unified development by allowing flexibility within the current zoning regulations. 
(2)	Benefits of MPDs include innovative design, the protection and accommodation of important natural resources and open space within the county, and the cost savings of fewer infrastructures. MPDs are reviewed individually to determine compatibility, suitability, and health, safety and welfare issues. Individual requirements relating to such developments become part of the site through conditions of zoning. 
(3)	Each MPD shall comply with the intent statement regarding MPDs in the applicable zoning district as described in Article 2. 
(4)	Review criteria. The following is a list of criteria that will be used by the County to determine the suitability of a proposed MPD in addition to the standards for approval of a special use contained in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code: 
a.	The uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses. 
b.	Exceptions from this Code are warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development plan. 
c.	Land surrounding the proposed development can be planned in coordination with the proposed development and will be compatible in use. 
d.	Master planned development is in conformance with the general intent of this code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
e.	Every MPD must be deemed by the Board of Commissioners to incorporate features of exceptional architectural, landscaping or site design prior to MPD approval. Such plans upon which this determination is made shall be incorporated into the MPD approval of the project, or shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners prior to building permitting. 
(c)	Development Parameters. The following general conditions apply to master planned developments (MPDs) according to the zoning district of the property. 
(1)	General requirements. [Added 2-13-2006] 
a.	A master planned development must contain at least 25 contiguous acres. 
b.	The primary access (i.e., main entrance) to the master planned development must be from a minor collector road or higher. 
(2)	The proportion and distribution of nonresidential to residential uses in a MPD is determined by the zoning category of the property. The zoning district also determines the maximum number of dwelling units and the type of commercial development that can be allowed in the MPD. These limitations and the distribution of residential density are shown on Table 5.3. Unless otherwise noted, the provisions of Table 5.3 override restrictions contained in the applicable zoning districts. 
TABLE 5.3. LAND USE DISTRIBUTION IN A MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 

 
Du/ac: dwelling units per gross residential acre. The gross residential acreage is the total acreage of the property excluding any acreage to be used for commercial development.  FAR (Floor Area Ratio): The gross floor area of the commercial building(s) divided by the net area of the commercial site. The net area of the commercial site excludes public and private rights-of-way and buffers.  Lots that will be serviced by individual septic systems must provide at least 25,500 sq. ft.  [Amended 9-20-2004, Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	When "neighborhood commercial" is allowed, development of the commercial area shall be controlled by the NRC district provisions, except as modified by this Section. 
(4)	When "community commercial" is allowed, development of the commercial area shall be controlled by the CRC district provisions, except as modified by this Section. 
(5)	Commercial structures and uses are to be located and designed as a unified development where feasible. As an addition to the NRC and CRC district provisions, residential and commercial uses may either be located in freestanding buildings within a site, or combined together within the same building. Loft dwellings in a mixed use building will be considered part of the commercial floor area but not part of the maximum residential density on the site. 
(6)	Development is to be carefully planned to ensure the benefits of MPDs are fully realized and potential negative impacts of one use on another are minimized, both within the development and along its periphery. Factors include separation of mixed use areas from single use area, pedestrian access linkages, and placement of open space and community amenities to define neighborhoods and provide community focus, peripheral buffers and transitions in use or intensity approaching the MPD boundary. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(7)	All master planned developments must provide internal pedestrian access including connections to external access points. The type of access such as sidewalks, bike paths, lanes and trails, will be established during the review period to determine the best way to serve a particular development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	[Deleted 2-19-2007] 
(e)	Minimum lot size. [Amended 2-19-2007] The minimum lot size per each developable lot in a MPD shall be negotiated with staff based on the unique natural features of a proposed development. The BOC shall have final authority to determine the minimum lot size for each MPD based on the qualities of the MPD to include natural features, and the amount of, access to and usability of open space areas. 
(f)	Minimum lot widths and setbacks. The minimum lot widths and minimum setbacks for lots in any MPD shall be as established on the concept plan approved for the MPD. No variances will be granted for individual lot development because someone desires to build a structure that will not fit on the lot as designed and platted since all setbacks were proposed by the developer and approved by the Board of Commissioners when the concept plan was presented. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(g)	[Deleted 2-13-2006] 
(h)	Buffer requirements. 
(1)	A permanent 50-foot buffer area shall be established around the perimeter of any MPD where it adjoins an agricultural zoning district. Except for a fence along the property line, no structure of any type shall be permitted in the buffer area. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
a.	Any such buffer located on a lot shall be identified as such on the final subdivision plat. 
b.	The buffer shall meet the requirements for buffers under the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Code. 
(2)	Internal buffers as would otherwise be required by the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Code between land use areas within a master planned development are waived, subject to conditions of special use approval for the master planned development. 
(i)	Ownership Control. 
(1)	All of the land in a MPD initially shall be in single ownership by an individual, a partnership, tenants in common, a corporation or by some other legal entity. 
(2)	The use of common open space and open green space and other common areas shall be governed by an owner's association which shall provide for: all users to have equal access and right of use to all shared facilities; perpetual and continued maintenance of open and shared space; tax liability in the case of default; mandatory membership in the owner's association and its creation is required before any individual properties are sold; the method of assessment for dues and related costs; and where appropriate, party wall maintenance and restoration in the event of damage or destruction. 
Sec. 508. - Owner's association. 
(a)	Homeowner's association; when required. For any residential development containing common open space or other lands in common ownership, a Homeowner's Association which provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital shall be required. 
(1)	Membership in the Homeowner's Association must be mandatory for each property in the development. 
(2)	Such associations must also include homeowner's declaration and bylaws, including covenants, conditions and regulations applicable to each property in the development. 
(3)	The declaration and bylaws shall be enforced by the Association or by an Association Management Company designated by them, which shall have the power to compel the payment of membership dues and assessments. 
(4)	The homeowners' association shall be formed under the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 3 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which is known as the "Georgia Property Owners' Association Act" (Code 1981, § 44-3-220 et seq. enacted by Ga. L. 1994, p. 1879, § 1) and shall contain adequate provisions to qualify it as a "holder" under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, if it is to act as a holder of a conservation easement. 
(5)	The documents creating the Homeowner's Association must provide that an adequate reserve fund for the Association will exist at the time that control of the Association transfers from the developer to the purchasers of homes in the development. The reserve fund must be equal to no less than one year's expenses reasonably expected for the minimum operations legally required of the Association. In lieu of a reserve fund, documents creating the Homeowner's Association may provide for a contract committing the developer to pay for all reasonable expenses of the Association for the one year period following transfer of control. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(6)	The covenants, conditions and regulations shall, at a minimum, regulate and control the following: 
a.	Equal access and right of use to all shared facilities; 
b.	Perpetual and continued maintenance of open and shared space, specifically including storm water detention facilities; 
c.	Tax liability in the case of default; 
d.	The method of assessment for dues and related costs; 
e.	Where appropriate, party wall maintenance and restoration in the event of damage or destruction; 
f.	Animals, including household pets; 
g.	Signs; 
h.	Exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments, and landscape areas and buffers; 
i.	Building improvements; 
j.	Outside storage; 
k.	Overnight parking of vehicles; 
l.	Decorations and holiday lighting; and 
m.	Trash collection containers. 
(7)	The Homeowner's Association shall be incorporated and organized at the same time the final plat for the subdivision or, if the subdivision is developed in phases, at the same time the plat for the first phase of the subdivision is first submitted. A copy of the Articles of Incorporation issued by the Secretary of State plus organizational minutes, including but not limited to adoption of by-laws, election of directors and officers and designation of depository for reserve funds required by this code, shall be submitted to Public Development at the time the final plat is submitted for recording. 
(b)	Owners' association. For nonresidential development projects, an association of the property owners that is consistent with the requirements for a homeowners' association will serve in lieu of the requirements of this Section. 
(c)	Condominium association. For condominium projects, incorporation of a Condominium Association consistent with state law will serve in lieu of the requirements of this Section, provided that: 
(1)	Specific maintenance responsibilities for storm water detention facilities are included; and 
(2)	The documents creating the Condominium Association must provide that an adequate reserve fund for the Association will exist at the time that control of the Association transfers from the developer to the purchasers of units in the development. The reserve fund must contain an amount equal to no less than one year of expenses reasonably expected for the minimum operations legally required of the Association. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 2c, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 509. - Concept Plan. [Added 2-13-2006] 
(a)	Concept plan; administration. 
(1)	Development of a MPD shall be guided by an approved concept plan for the overall project. Prior to any land development activity or the issuance of a building permit, the concept plan shall have been approved by staff or the Board of Commissioners, as appropriate, and subsequent development must substantially conform to the approved concept plan. 
(2)	The level of detail to be shown on a MPD concept plan shall reflect the scale of the proposed project. For a mixed-use development, the various areas by housing type and land use category are to be identified and the parameters of development identified for each area. A MPD involving only one type of housing would present more detail regarding the layout of the development. 
a.	The concept plan for a MPD involving only one type of housing shall conform to the requirements for a development under Sections 1207 and 1208. 
b.	The concept plan for a mixed-use MPD must designate the type of development planned for each area. The concept plan shall illustrate the individual lot lines within each subdivision and the building outlines in each condominium, multi-family or nonresidential project, and must conform to the requirement for a development under Sections 1207 and 1208. 
(b)	Impact analyses. 
(1)	Zoning impact analysis. Every initially proposed MPD concept plan shall be accompanied by a narrative specifically addressing each of the standards set forth in Section 1205(c). 
(2)	Every initially proposed Open Space subdivision or MPD concept plan that is capable of generating 1,200 average daily vehicle trips or more shall be accompanied by a traffic analysis prepared under the guidelines in Section 1205(c) as requested by the County Engineer. 
(3)	Modifications to the concept plan. Development of each portion of a MPD must substantially conform to the approved concept plan. If any preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision plat is proposed that does not substantially conform, the concept plan must first be modified before the preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision plat can be approved. Modifications of the concept plan for an MPD can only be approved by the Board of Commissioners, following the same procedures as the initial approval of the original concept plan under Section 1205. 
(4)	Concept Plan updates required. The MPD concept plan is to be updated as individual site plans are approved for construction or final subdivision plats are recorded. Updating is an administrative process for submission to the Public Development Department, and is intended to provide a record of the MPD as build-out progresses. No update will be allowed that does not substantially conform to the approved concept plan. 
DIVISION II. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 510. - West Jackson Corridor Overlay District Boundaries. 
This Article applies to land in unincorporated Jackson County along Lewis Braselton Blvd., Davis Street, SR 124 and SR53 identified as the West Jackson Corridor Overlay District as depicted on the Official Jackson County Zoning Map. All property contained within any parcel subject to this Section on the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall continue to be subject to this Section, even if the parcel is subdivided in the future. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 511. - Effect of West Jackson Corridor Overlay District Provisions. 
(a)	Application. This Overlay District is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the Jackson County Unified Development Code governing all properties and approvals within this Overlay District. The provisions of this Article shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations and other Jackson County ordinances. The Public Development Director is authorized to promulgate and enforce such rules, regulations, guidelines, and standards as may be reasonably necessary or desirable to give effect to the provisions of this Article. 
(b)	Relationship to underlying Zoning District Standards and other Provisions of this code. In any case where the standards and requirements of the Overlay District conflict with those of the base-zoning district or with other provisions of this code, the standards and requirements of the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c)	Exceptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Completion of work subject to preliminary plats, site development plans, construction plans, building permits, or interior finish permits approved prior to the effective date of this Article. 
(2)	Improvements and additions that are made to a single-family residence previously permitted and built on a lot of record prior to enactment of this Article. 
(3)	Construction of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record within a single family residential subdivision with final plat approved prior to enactment of this Article, provided that the new construction shall be of a similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. 
(4)	Construction, rehabilitation, restoration, repair of a non-residential structure, interior renovations or interior finishes within an existing structure, or addition to an existing non-residential structure that was permitted prior to the enactment of this Article shall not be subject to the provisions of the West Jackson Corridor Overlay District, provided that such construction is on a lot of record and does not affect a change to more than 20 percent of the existing permitted structure or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(5)	Agriculturally zoned property (PCFD, A-1, A-2, A-3 and AR). At the time of rezoning the existing structures shall be required to be upgraded, altered, or removed to meet to the standards of this Overlay District. 
(d)	Building Plan Application. 
(1)	All building plans must be submitted with the development plan for review. Approval must be granted by Public Development prior to submission to the building department for review. 
(2)	All building plans submitted pursuant to an application for approval should clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each façade as described in Section 512(k). 
(3)	Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 512. - Property Development Standards. 
(a)	Special Uses. The following uses shall require special use approval in accordance with the procedures of Article 12 if not otherwise required by the Zoning District. 
(1)	Self service storage or mini-warehouse facilities. 
(2)	Salvage, junk, wrecking and scrap yards. 
(3)	Adult bookstore. 
(4)	Sexually oriented businesses or establishments. 
(5)	Pawnshop or loan brokers, other than mortgage loan brokers. 
(6)	Rooming and boarding houses. 
(7)	Automotive repair and maintenance. 
(8)	Outdoor commercial recreation. 
(9)	Car washes. 
(10)	Outdoor storage or display. 
(11)	Non-residential buildings in excess of 150,000 square feet. 
(12)	Exceptions to building height standards as set forth in Subsection 512(k)(6) below. 
(b)	Ground Floor Area Limitation. New non-residential buildings may not exceed 150,000 gross square feet in ground floor area unless approved by the Board of Commissioners as a Special Use approval. In determining whether to grant an increase in ground floor size beyond 150,000 square feet, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following factors, in addition to those listed in Article 12: 
(1)	The site has safe, immediate access to a public maintained collector roadway as applicable. 
(2)	The building site will provide convenient interconnections with adjacent uses and properties that serve both pedestrians and automobiles. 
(3)	The floor area of the proposed building is the smallest feasible to serve the function of the proposed use. 
(4)	The architectural design of the building reduces the perceived size of the building by appropriate articulations and variations in the massing, façade, roofline, materials, colors, and textures of the building exterior. 
(5)	The building and site meets or exceeds all other standards set forth in this ordinance and by the Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
(c)	Lot Standards. 
(1)	Minimum lot size shall be 1 acre for out parcels or stand-alone commercial projects. 
(2)	Minimum lot size shall be 2 acres for out parcels or stand-alone industrial projects. 
(3)	Minimum commercial or industrial lot frontage: 175 feet. 
(4)	Non-residential lots shall be generally rectangular with a ratio of depth to frontage not greater than 4:1. 
(5)	Residential subdivisions shall comply with one of the following two requirements: (see Section 514(a), Figure 1) 
a.	Reverse-fronting lots are required for residential subdivisions along streets classified as arterials or collectors, subject to subparagraph b. below. Reverse-frontage residential lots shall be platted with a non-encroachable landscaped easement restricting vehicular access and shall be placed adjacent to the public right-of-way as required by Section 806 of this code. Such easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in depth and include one of the following: 
1.	A continuous 4-foot high solid wall constructed entirely of brick or stone masonry. 
2.	A 4-foot high fence constructed of a combination of brick or stone masonry pillars with iron pickets. 
3.	A vegetated strip of canopy trees, shrubs, and groundcover that provide a full landscape buffer. 
b.	If a residential lot is separated from the arterial or collector street by a minimum 20-foot wide landscaped strip and a residential street, a residential lot may face an arterial or a collector street. 
(d)	Access Management Standards. 
(1)	Driveways. Driveway connections to public streets shall be consistent with the following standards: 
a.	Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the controlled access zone of an intersection. (See Section 514(a), Figure 2) 
b.	Out parcels with less than 200 feet of road frontage are restricted to access from within the commercial or industrial development only. 
c.	Driveways that enter a thoroughfare at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes (one for each turning direction) of at least 11 feet in width, and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 11 feet. 
d.	No residentially developed property may have a curb cut in excess of 30 feet in width, and no nonresidential property may have a curb cut in excess of 40 feet without approval of the Public Development Director. Standards in Section 1013 shall be followed. 
e.	Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
f.	Except where driveways are on opposite sides of a raised median, driveways on opposite sides of a street shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet, as measured between the extended centerlines of such driveways. 
g.	Whenever possible, driveways on undivided arterial, collector, or local streets should align with driveways (if any) on the opposite side of such street. 
h.	On a divided arterial street that includes a median, driveways should align with median breaks whenever possible. Driveways not meeting this standard shall be limited to right turn ingress access and right turn egress. 
i.	Driveway throat length. The length of a driveway or "throat length" for a commercial/industrial development shall be designed in accordance with the vehicle storage required for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site vehicle circulation. The throat lengths specified in Table 5.4 are generally acceptable guidelines intended for the major entrance driveway of a commercial/industrial development (see Section 514, Figure 3). 
TABLE 5.4. DRIVEWAY THROAT LENGTH FOR COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL CENTERS 

 
*For driveways that allow right turns only the throat length may be reduced by one third. 
(2)	Deceleration Lanes. 
a.	A major driveway entering a street with a regulated arterial speed greater than 35 miles per hour shall be required to provide a deceleration lane consistent with the standards set forth in Sections 1013 and 1014 of the Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
b.	An acceleration or deceleration lane that would begin or end within 75 feet of another driveway or intersecting street shall be lengthened so that it connects with the adjacent street or driveway. 
(e)	Landscaped Strip to Screen Parking Lots and Loading Areas. 
(1)	Where a parking lot or loading area for a commercial, industrial, or institutional use is located adjacent to the public right-of-way, it shall be screened from the public right-of-way consistent with Section 809 of the Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
(2)	Setbacks for screening areas facing the West Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be based on future right-of-way consistent with Section 514, Figure 5. 
(f)	Environmental Controls. 
(1)	Storm water management design shall comply in all respects with the Jackson County Unified Development Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)	Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking areas shall incorporate landscaped areas as required in Article 6 of the UDC. Such landscaped areas shall cover at least 12 percent of the parking area. 
(g)	Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be required as in Article 6 of the Jackson County Unified Development Code, except as provided in this subsection: 
(1)	Maximum number of parking spaces. The maximum number of parking spaces that may be constructed on impervious surfaces shall be no more than 105 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces. Parking spaces in excess of 105 percent shall be constructed on pervious surfaces recommended in paragraph 4(b) of this subsection. 
(2)	Pedestrian circulation. Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. Commercial and multi-family developments shall provide designated pedestrian pathways or sidewalks connecting the front entrance of the principal building to the sidewalk along the abutting street, including marked crosswalks across interior driveways. (See Section 514, Figures 4 & 5) 
(3)	Parking lot landscaping. Parking areas shall incorporate landscaped areas as required in Article 6 of this code. Such landscaped areas shall cover at least 12 percent of the parking area. 
(4)	Paving materials for parking lots. 
a.	All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete as required in Section 607 of the Unified Development Code, or consists of a pervious material approved by the Public Development Director. 
b.	Pervious paving. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in Volume 2 Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the Porous Concrete or Modular Porous Paver Systems under the Limited Application Stormwater Structural Controls. 
c.	Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles as required in Sections 607 and 609 of the UDC. 
(5)	Shared parking. 
a.	The parking spaces provided for separate uses may be combined in one parking lot but the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
1.	Shared parking between day and night users (per peak parking requirements). One-half of the parking spaces assigned to a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
2.	Mixed use developments. Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Director of Public Development finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. The ratios on Table 5.5 may be used in determining the time of day and the day of the week at which the maximum number of spaces will be needed by the uses served by the shared parking facility. 
3.	Recordation of shared parking agreement. Shared parking arrangements must be committed to writing in an instrument acceptable to the Director of Public Development, and approved by the owners of each of the affected properties or uses. The instrument must be approved by the Director of Public Development and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court, and a copy of the recorded document must be supplied to the Director of Public Development. The document must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity. 
TABLE 5.5: PERCENTAGE OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES BY TIME PERIOD 

 
By way of example, the following illustrates shared parking calculations for a particular mixed-use development: 

 
Spaces Required applying the Peak Demand Percentages to the Example: 

 
Highest demand = 978 (instead of 1,340) 
(h)	Dumpsters. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be located where they are not visible from adjacent residentially-zoned and residentially used properties and shall be adequately screened from view from all other adjacent properties and streets. 
b.	Dumpsters shall be enclosed either within a building or out of sight from public streets or located outside to the rear of the principal building as provided in Section 805(b). 
c.	Dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from all property lines. If a buffer is required on the subject property line, the dumpster shall not be located within the buffer or landscape strip. 
(2)	Pad. 
a.	Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
b.	Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
(i)	Hardscape. All hardscape accessory items, such as news boxes/racks, vending machines, ice machines, garbage cans, mailboxes, etc., shall be shielded from view of all adjacent agriculturally or residentially zoned properties and right-of-ways. 
(j)	Lighting. 
(1)	Streetlights. 
a.	Streetlights shall be provided on all public streets; provided, however, within the right-of-way of State Routes streetlights are not required. 
b.	The spacing of street lights shall be staggered, 150 feet on-center, along both sides of the roadway. 
c.	All street lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the Jackson County Public Development Department. 
d.	All roadway lighting and streetlights shall be full cut-off type. Parking lot lights shall be the semi-cutoff type. Pedestrian lights shall be the semi-cutoff, cutoff, or full-cutoff type. 
e.	Streetlights shall be consistent with Table 5.5 and Section 514, Figure 7. 
f.	The American National Standard Practice of Roadway Light of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American Standards Institute, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation 
(2)	Parking Lot, Sidewalk, and Building Illumination. 
a.	Lighting shall be designed to prevent light spillover on to adjacent properties. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, or be cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward and does not cross any property line of the site. 
b.	Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, or color corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site. 
c.	Pedestrian lights shall be consistent with Table 5.6. and Section 514, Figure 7. 
TABLE 5.6: LIGHTING SPECIFICATIONS 

 
*Collector streets only. Streetlights on other streets may employ other fixture types per approval of the Public Development Department. 
d.	Parking light fixtures shall be the box head type, shall have a maximum height of 35 feet, and shall employ a fluted pole. All parking light fixtures and poles shall be black. If the light fixture is taller than the building(s) being served additional screening and buffering must be used at the outer limits of the property to screen the light poles if the adjacent property(ies) is residentially or agriculturally zoned. 
(3)	Pedestrian Lights. 
a.	Semi-cutoff luminaries shall be used for all security lighting. 
b.	The number of luminaires remaining on for security lighting shall not exceed one fourth the total number of each type of luminaire used for the maximum level of illumination, after dividing the total number by four, any remainder is counted as a whole number. 
(4)	Sign Illumination. 
a.	Automatic changeable copy signs, and neon signs are prohibited. 
b.	Signs may be illuminated with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed downward and away from streets and adjacent property and public streets. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, or be full cut-off luminary fixtures. 
(5)	Drive-under Canopies and Pump Islands at Fueling Stations. The luminaire shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the luminaire does not extend below the ceiling. 
(k)	Architectural Standards. The following design guidelines and standards apply to all newly constructed buildings used for multifamily residential, office, commercial, or industrial purposes to include all accessory structures. These standards do not apply to single-family residential or duplex uses. 
(1)	General Architectural Requirements. 
a.	The use of a common palette of building materials should be maintained for building façades to create a consistent and traditional architectural identity. Traditional architecture shall include, for example, the use of brick, pitched roofs, low-profile signage, and subdued colors. For large commercial/retail buildings and multifamily buildings, variations in façade, roofline and depth should be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. All design and construction shall be subject to architectural review by the County or its designated architect to ensure adherence with this Section and that the structures present traditional architecture design. 
b.	All ground or roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence made of brick, stucco, split face block, or landscaping. 
c.	For all buildings, roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within 300 feet) on all sides by a raised parapet or pitched roof along the edge of the roofline. 
d.	Contrasting accent colors on any single façade shall be limited to no more than 10 percent of the total wall area for any single façade. 
e.	Permanent mounted exposed exterior neon lights shall not be allowed. 
f.	Any exterior lighted bands shall be considered as part of the maximum 10 percent of contrasting accent colors as restricted under Section 512(k)(1)(d). 
g.	Buildings that are located within the same development shall be constructed of similar materials and colors to show continuity between all out parcels, accessory buildings, and principal building. 
h.	Roof-mounted lights, and/or roof-mounted flag poles are not permitted. 
i.	Satellite dishes shall be located and painted to blend with the background as much as practical. 
(2)	Building Materials. Table 5.7 and this subsection outlines allowed building materials that may be used and combined to create a consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design: 
TABLE 5.7 

 
a.	Allowed building materials. 
1.	Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
2.	Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
3.	Split-face block/concrete masonry unit (CMU) is restricted to 10% of the surface area of the façade; 
4.	Tilt/architectural pre-cast concrete is permitted by Special Use approval with a design plan consistent with the surrounding development and area; 
5.	High grade stucco is restricted to 50% of the surface area of a façade; 
6.	Natural wood and/or cement-based artificial wood siding are allowed only for residential buildings; 
7.	Glass is restricted to 50% of the surface area of a façade; 
8.	Exposed concrete block, metal, and tile are not allowed as building materials on a façade. 
b.	Ratios and Amounts of Allowed Building Materials. 
1.	Accent/Trim Exterior Building Material. Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the façade of the building or for decorative elements, but shall not exceed 10% of total wall area per façade. 
2.	Façade Calculations. With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two primary building materials used. When stucco or glass is used as a building material for a facade, it is restricted to 50% of the total. The allowed façade materials shall not apply to entry doors and/or roll-up doors. 
c.	[Calculation formula.] The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per façade. 
For example, a building has a front façade with a gross façade area of 1,200 square feet with 400 square feet consisting of windows and doors. Begin with 1,200 square feet for required building material calculations. A wall area of 1,200 square feet shall have no more than 600 square feet of stucco on the front façade [e.g., (1,200 X 50% = 600)]. The balance shall be brick or other allowed material. Trim or accent material may account for up to 10% or 120 square feet, which ever is less. 
d.	[Canopy support columns]. The support columns for drive under canopies for gasoline pumps shall be made of the same material as the primary building on the property and will match the trim and accent material. Trim or accent material may account for up to 10% or 120 square feet, which ever is less. Any signage on this structure shall be counted towards the 10% accent material maximum, in addition to having to meet signage requirements of this code. 
(3)	Roof Requirements. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory finished sheet metal. 
a.	Pitched Roofs. All buildings less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area must have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4:12. All one-story buildings less than 10,000 gross square feet must have a pitched roof (between 3:12 and 12:12); provided, however, that if a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof is required. Designers must provide a pitched roof on front and side of the building to screen the view of any flat roof. Arcades, drive-under canopies, porches, and other features must be designed with pitched roofs. 
b.	Mansard Roofs. Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum 12-foot vertical surface length. 
c.	Flat Roofs. Building materials for flat roofs shall meet the state building code requirements for nonresidential buildings. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal. If factory finished metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be subdued to blend with other materials or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. All buildings and structures with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front façade(s) of such building or structure. There shall be roof articulations/offsets at a minimum of one per each 125 linear feet of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front façade is less than 125 linear feet of length, then a minimum of one roof articulation must occur. 
d.	Other. Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have flat roofs with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 
(4)	Arcade/Structural Canopy for Retail Use. For any multi-tenant commercial development, a covered arcade/structural canopy shall be provided along the front façade of the building. Arcades are covered walkways connected to the principal building. They should be a minimum of five feet in width and designed to provide covered areas for relief from the weather. Different arcade/structural canopy designs may be used for each individual tenant/business within a multi-tenant commercial development provided that they blend aesthetically with the front façade of the building and has the approval of the building owner and the Public Development Director. 
(5)	Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets. 
(6)	Building height. Any building of which 50 percent or more is located within 250 feet of the centerline of an arterial or collector street shall be no more than three stories in height. A relief from height restrictions shall only be allowed if special use approval is granted by the Board of Commissioners, in accordance with procedures in Article 12 of the Unified Development Code. In deciding whether to grant a height increase, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following factors, in addition to those listed in Section 1206: 
Proximity and relationship of the proposed building to other buildings that are more than three stories or 35 feet in height. 
Impact of the proposed building on single-family residences on nearby tracts. 
Topography and vegetation that screen the view of the proposed building. 
On-site screening and/or landscaped buffers. 
Provision of public open space in exchange for increased building height. 
The effect of additional building height on traffic congestion. 
Access of the site to the traffic pattern. 
Economic development opportunities for the Jackson County. 
The necessity of greater building height to the function of the proposed use. 
The quality of the architectural design and its compatibility with its surroundings. 
The capability of the designated fire district to adequately handle a fire or other emergency situation for the proposed structure using existing equipment and personnel. 
(7)	Building massing and modulation. (See Section 514, Figure 6) The massing of building façades longer than 150 feet that are approximately parallel to the right-of-way and oriented to a public street shall be modulated to increase visual interest, as follows. 
a.	Building façades that are less than 500 feet long shall be modulated at intervals no greater than 100 feet in length. 
b.	Building façades that are more than 500 feet long shall be modulated with intervals no greater than 20 percent of the length of the façade. 
(8)	[Heated space requirement.] No nonresidential building shall have less than 2,000 square feet of heated floor space. 
(9)	[Cornice requirement.] Building design shall include minimum one-foot deep cornices along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least 10 feet along the sides of buildings. 
(10)	[Contrasting base.] Building designs shall include a minimum two-foot high contrasting base, along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least 10 feet along the sides of buildings. 
(11)	Satellite Dish Antennas. No satellite dishes shall be permitted within view from public streets. 
(12)	Off-street loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be located in the rear of buildings and screened from view from adjacent property or streets. 
(l)	Signage. Except as provided in this subsection, signage shall comply with the regulations in Article 7 of the Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
(1)	Freestanding and project entrance signs shall be limited to ground signs (monument signs). The base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
(2)	The maximum sign area of any ground sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
a.	Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial, including shared signs, on lots with more than 1 tenant shall be no greater than 100 square feet in sign area. 
b.	Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial with 1 tenant shall be no greater than 50 square feet in sign area. 
c.	Ground signs for single business premises shall be no greater than 32 square feet in sign area. 
(3)	Ground signs for lots zoned commercial or industrial, shall be limited to a height of no greater than 15 feet including the base and sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 513. - Public Improvement Standards. 
Public rights-of-way within West Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be improved in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)	Street Standards. Public rights-of-way located within the West Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be classified by type (i.e. Arterial, Collector, Local, or Access) as described in this section and shall also be consistent with Section 514. Each type of roadway is based off of the existing speed limit at the time of development, as follows: 
(1)	Arterial. (future design for Highway Corridor District, see Section 514, Figure 8) 
a.	45 to 55 mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 150-foot right-of-way. 
c.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. 
3.	Landscaping: 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the arterial. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
d.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of arterial. 
e.	Street trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of arterial. 
(2)	Collector. (See Section 514, Figure 9) 
a.	35-mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 64-foot right-of-way. 
c.	Depending on adjacent land use, lanes shall conform to one of the following two options: 
1.	Two travel lanes at 12 feet with center turn lane at 14 feet in commercial areas. 
2.	Two travel lanes at 12 feet with turn lane at intersection and on-street parking provided between intersections for planned developments or residential areas. 
d.	24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Street lights and pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. 
3.	Landscaping: 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip; see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the collector. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
f.	6-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip (both sides of street). 
g.	Streetlights and pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of collector. 
h.	Street trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of collector. 
(3)	Local Streets. (See Section 514, Figure 10) 
a.	25-mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 50-foot right-of-way. 
c.	Two travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
d.	24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. 
3.	Landscaping: 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the local streets. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip; see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the local streets. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
f.	6-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
g.	Streetlights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of local street. 
h.	Street trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of local street. 
(4)	Access Street (See Section 514, Figure 11). 
a.	Interior roadway within a commercial, industrial, or multifamily development; not to be maintained or owned by Jackson County. 
b.	Minimum 50-foot right-of-way. 
c.	Two travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
d.	18-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.	5-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb. 
f.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the access street. 
3.	Landscaping: 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the access street. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the access street. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
g.	Street trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of local street. 
(5)	Underground utilities are required for all street frontages. Upon written application pursuant to Article 13, an exception may be granted by the Board of Adjustment in cases where, due to unique topography or the presence of rock, the installation of underground utilities would present a severe and unique hardship. 
[(6)]	Any proposed or future roadway must meet the requirements above and shall be classified by the Public Development Director or designee. 
(b)	Network Standards. 
(1)	Connectivity. Within all nonresidential or multi-family developments or any single family residential development of 5 or more acres, the following standards shall apply unless a variance is sought and obtained from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Article 13 due to unusual topography or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers that create a severe and unique hardship: 
a.	No local street may be longer than 600 feet without an intersection with another local through street. Cul-de-sac streets shall not count as through streets. (See Section 514, Figure 12) 
b.	Continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect building entrances to required sidewalks along street frontage. 
c.	A cul-de-sac street that ends within 200 feet of the right-of-way of an adjacent collector or arterial street shall provide a 5-foot wide sidewalk in a 10-foot wide easement connecting the sidewalk on the cul-de-sac to the sidewalk on the adjacent collector or arterial street. 
d.	Dead-end streets, including cul-de-sac streets, shall not exceed 300 feet in length and shall not serve more than 30 dwelling units. 
(2)	Vehicular Access Points: Minimum number of driveways or streets required per Table 5.8 below. 
TABLE 5.8. MINIMUM VEHICULAR ACCESS POINTS 

 
(3)	Utilization and Provision of Sub-arterial Street Connections to and from Adjacent Developments and Developable Parcels. 
a.	All development plans shall incorporate and continue all sub-arterial streets stubbed to the boundary of the development plan by previously approved development plans or existing development. 
b.	All development plans shall provide for future public street connections to adjacent developable parcels by providing a local street connection spaced at intervals not to exceed 600 feet along each development plan boundary that abuts potentially developable or redevelopable land. 
c.	An easement agreement must be draft[ed] by the developer and/or property owner and approved by the Public Development Director prior to approval of development plans. Said agreement must allow access from neighboring developments as they currently exist or any future developments. Said agreement must also be noted on all development plans and the easement agreement must be recorded in the County Clerk's office. 
(4)	Interparcel Access. For developments along an arterial or collector street, except where a variance is sought and obtained from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Article 13 because of topographic or other site-specific constraints that create a unique and severe hardship, compatible developments, as determined by the Public Development Director, shall provide a network of non-residential access streets that meet the following: 
a.	Access streets shall be constructed for a commercial or multifamily residential development that abuts another commercial or multi-family residential development, whether existing or planned (according to either the zoning map and/or the future land use map). The development of the site shall incorporate the following: 
1.	Continuous non-residential access street, where necessary to connect adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
2.	Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access. 
b.	New commercial or multifamily property that abuts a planned, new or existing multifamily residential property shall provide for a 5-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two uses. The sidewalk as required shall be continued to the property line for future connectivity. 
c.	New multifamily residential development that abuts a planned, new or existing commercial property shall provide for a 5-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two uses. The sidewalk as required shall be continued to the property line for future connectivity. 
(5)	Crosswalks. 
a.	All intersections shall contain crosswalks that connect to sidewalks in all quadrants. Crosswalks shall not cross over a state highway or county arterial or collector roadway. 
b.	Crosswalks shall be either identified with high-reflectivity thermoplastic paint or brick pavers. 
(c)	Required Tree Species. Table 5.9 shall list the various tree species as applicable to the placement of such trees. Refer to Table 5.9 to get the scientific name, common name, required spacing, and permitted uses for required trees located within the West Jackson Overlay. 
(1)	No more than 25 percent of the trees installed may be of any one genus. 
(2)	No more than 50 percent of the street trees used in a single development shall be of the small tree species. 
(3)	Refer to the permitted uses in Table 5.9 for the permitted locations per tree species. Note that if there is, or will be per the development plan, a power line located above any tree location that the tree species labeled "under power lines" can be used in any location. 
TABLE 5.9 LARGE AND SMALL TREE SPECIES 

 
(d)	Improvement Guarantees. See Article 12 for Performance Bond and Maintenance Bond requirements. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 2d, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 514. - Design Guidelines. 
(a)	Property Development Standards. 











Sec. 515. - Airport design overlay boundaries. 
This Article applies to land parcels of record within unincorporated Jackson County owned by Jackson County and operated by the Jackson County Airport Authority as of the date this ordinance is adopted; as depicted on Figure "A." See Section 356 for Airport Zone Restrictions for all property included in the Airport Zone rather then the Airport Design overlay as depicted in Figure "A." 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2a, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 516. - Effect of airport design overlay district provisions. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of the Airport Development Standards is to establish principles for development of the parcels and conduct of operations within the Jackson County Airport, as shown in Figure "A". The development standards are intended to create a safe, high quality, efficient, and aesthetically pleasing airport. The development standards will provide for a level of consistency throughout the Airport while providing flexibility for development. Control of the design, development, and construction activities undertaken by any developer are essential to achieving this goal. 
(b)	Goals. The goal of the development standards is to create and maintain a positive ambience and strong sense of community throughout the Airport, while promoting fair and equitable competition among its tenants. The standards shall identify functional, architectural, and site design treatments, which will enhance the visual appearance of all development at the Airport, while providing for design flexibility. These development standards incorporate a basic level of architectural and site design features which incorporate safe and convenient vehicular use areas, landscape, lighting, and signage treatment, in order to provide a comprehensive plan for building design and site development. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2b, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 517. - Airport property development standards. 
(a)	Permitted uses/special uses. All the following uses are permitted or permitted with restrictions as listed in Table 2.2 in Section 208. All uses that are permitted or permitted with restrictions in Table 2.2 in Section 208 that are not listed below will require a special use approval in accordance with the procedures of Article 12. 
(1)	Commercial. 
a.	Ambulance services. 
b.	Building construction and general contracting, office only. 
(2)	Transportation. 
a.	Airport, landing strips, and other air transportation. 
b.	Bus station. 
c.	Charter bus. 
d.	Commuter rail stations. 
e.	Freight agency or shipping coordinators involved in the remote arrangement of freight or cargo transportation. 
f.	Freight transportation arrangement. 
g.	Heliport. 
h.	Pipeline transportation company. 
i.	Rail transportation company. 
j.	Scenic and sightseeing transportation. 
k.	School and employee bus transportation. 
l.	Special needs transportation. 
m.	Mixed mode and other urban transit. 
(3)	Utilities. 
a.	Co-generation facility. 
b.	Natural gas distribution. 
(b)	Federal Aviation Administration requirements. These minimum development standards apply to lease areas within the Airport boundary, as shown in Figure "A". Within this boundary, all applicable FAA requirements shall be enforced. No structures, buildings or other improvements, nor emissions or transmissions, including, but not limited to, light, communications, sound, radio waves, electronic interference, radar, smoke, steam or fog, nor any other operational aspects of any sort related to such structures, buildings or improvements, shall be permitted that would potentially interfere with airport, aircraft, or navigational aid operations. All airside and landside facilities shall be in full compliance with all dimensional criteria and standards set forth by both the Airport and the FAA. 
(c)	Application process and review procedures. The following review procedures will be conducted by both Jackson County Public Development and the Jackson County Airport Authority. 
(1)	Prospective developers shall submit a completed FAA Airspace Study Checklist for proposed any airport development. Checklists are available through the Airport Manager. All plans and construction drawings for structures, improvements, paved areas, buffers, and landscaping shall meet at least the minimum development standards set forth in this Development Code. 
(2)	Copies of all plans and specifications, including building elevations and finish samples, shall be provided to the Airport Authority for its consideration. Approval by the Airport Authority shall precede approval from Jackson County Public Development office. Once approval has been granted, the following signature block must be added to the cover page of plans and signed prior to approval from Jackson County Public Development: 
CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL 
All applicable requirements of the Jackson County Airport Authority relative to Project Approval having been fulfilled, approval of this [site plan] is hereby granted by the Jackson County Airport Authority, subject to further compliance with all provisions of the Jackson County Unified Development Code. ;b2;;namerule;;eol;by Airport Authority 
Date ____________ 
NOT FOR RECORDING 
(3)	Copies of all plans and specifications, including building elevations and finish samples, shall be provided to the Public Development Department in accordance with the Development Review Application with all supporting documentation required by the checklist, as determined by Jackson County Public Development. See Article 12 for a complete list of procedures and permits. 
(4)	Prior to the issuance of a C.O., a Certificate of Compliance must be applied for and approved through both the Airport Authority and Public Development. The following signature block must be added to the final site plan. A complete site plan showing all improvements to the site must be turned in with the application for a Certificate of Compliance. 
CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL 
All applicable requirements of the Jackson County Airport Authority relative to Project Approval having been fulfilled, approval of this [site plan] is hereby granted by the Jackson County Airport Manager, subject to further compliance with all provisions of the Jackson County Unified Development Code. ;b2;;namerule;;eol;by Airport Authority 
Date ____________ 
  
(d)	Minimum lot width/depth. All leased lots must meet the following minimum requirements; the minimum lot width is 150 feet and the minimum lot depth is 200 feet. 
(e)	Building orientation. For buildings contiguous with the Airport Operations Area (AOA) fence, a distinct entrance for airside and landside users shall be provided. Airport Operations Area is defined as any area of the airport used or intended to be used for landing, takeoff and surface maneuver of any aircraft. Building footprints shall be presented on the site plan. Building on each site shall be oriented to minimize service docks, dumpsters, refuse collection areas, stockpiles, and overhead doors to public view. 
(f)	Mechanical/building equipment. All mechanical equipment, including all roof mounted equipment and satellite dishes, shall be enclosed or screened so as to be an integral part of the architectural design and not in public view. The screening shall be opaque in nature and shall be a minimum of six feet tall, when ground mounted. The screen material may be masonry or metal cladding, with the colors and finishing reflecting those used in the primary building. The screen material may be topped with barbed or razor wire, if necessary, for security purposes. 
If the mechanical equipment is located on the roof of the structure, it shall be screened from view by using an opaque parapet wall. The parapet wall is an extension of the exterior walls. The parapet wall shall reflect the color and materials of the primary building. Non glare or non reflective material shall be utilized for any mechanical equipment that is roof mounted. Additionally, all roof appurtenances projecting above the roof, such as exhaust fans, heating and air conditioning units, condensers, elevator equipment, plumbing vents, and stacks shall be screened from view. 
(g)	Setbacks. 
(1)	Setback requirements of this development code shall apply to all buildings, building lines, boundary lines, leased lots and to the airport as a whole. 
(2)	All building parking areas shall conform to all setbacks from FAA airfield ramps, taxiways, and outer areas used by aircraft. 
(3)	All Jackson County and FAA setbacks shall be noted on all plans and plats. 
(h)	Appearance. Exterior colors and textures shall harmonize with other buildings and structures. All exterior colors shall be neutral colors. The Airport Authority reserves the right to disapprove exterior materials or finishes that it feels will detract from the overall visual impression of the airport. The objective of the Airport Design Overlay is to ensure that all new construction is of high quality and utilizes materials and finishes which will maintain their appearance with low maintenance. 
(1)	Since roofs will be highly visible from aircraft using the airport, roofs shall be attractively designed and constructed. Equipment located on roofs shall be screened. Signs, lettering, designs, or other graphics may not be placed, painted, or otherwise located on roofs. 
(2)	Hangars and hangar type buildings shall be constructed with steel or aluminum with non glare roofing. All exterior metal surfaces shall have a durable finish applied at the point of manufacture. 
(3)	All exposed masonry shall be waterproofed. 
(4)	All building renderings must be approved by the Airport Authority prior to approval through public development. 
(5)	Building materials that produce glare or other effects that are hazardous to aircraft operation shall not be permitted. Windows and large areas are to be composed of non reflective glass. 
(6)	All glass used in the building system must be scratch and chip resistant. 
(7)	All commercial buildings must have a floor drain connected to an oil/water separator and then disposed of through an approved method. Review of the oil/water separator must be approved by Jackson County Environmental Health Department. 
(i)	Outside storage. Section 305 shall apply to all leased property. 
(j)	Accessory buildings/uses. Section 302(d) shall apply to all leased property. 
(k)	Security. Development shall be designed, constructed, and separated in a manner that assists the Airport Authority in controlling access from the landside to the airside. Security access points shall be designated on the site plan submitted to the Airport Authority, and shall fully comply with all standards set forth by the Airport Authority and Jackson County. Coordination with the Airport Authority will be essential to assure that the latest and most up to date information is available during development and construction of airport facilities. Owner shall control the premises as to prevent unauthorized access to the Airport Operations Area (AOA). 
(l)	Fencing. Security fencing shall be provided between aircraft and non aircraft areas to prevent uncontrolled access, to limit pedestrian and vehicular interference with aircraft movements, and to provide security for parked aircraft. Ten feet of clearance shall be provided along both sides of the Airport security fence to facilitate maintenance and emergency access and to minimize unauthorized access into the AOA. Fencing shall be a minimum height of six feet. Gates must have no more than three inches of clearance at the bottom to prevent intrusion by animals such as coyotes/dogs. Wildlife fencing is required on leased areas along the Airport's perimeter. All fencing shall comply with all FAA rules and regulations. All other fencing shall be fractured fin, concrete masonry units, or chain link with ten feet of landscape border (same height as fence) screening chain link on the public side. Black coated chain link fencing only may be used within the lease area. Fences shall be designated on the site plan. 
(m)	Vehicular access. Vehicular access to aircraft storage hangars shall minimize crossing of aircraft operating areas. Automobile parking shall be provided for aircraft storage hangars in locations that do not interfere with aircraft operations. No vehicle parking shall be provided on ramp areas except for necessary service vehicles. Airside pedestrian and vehicular access to buildings normally open to the public shall avoid crossing aircraft operating areas. All improvements or facilities sited on the landside/Aircraft Operations Area (AOA) interface shall have appropriate access to both the landside and the AOA. All aircraft and aviation related structures and buildings shall be approved by both the Airport Authority and Jackson County Public Development. All customer facilities and accommodations for passengers and crew of transient aircraft must comply with local, state and federal laws regarding accommodations for the disabled. Landside shall be the side of the building that is located the furthest away from the airport runway. 
(n)	Driveways and loading areas. Driveways and other curb cuts will not exceed one curb cut when road frontage under 200 feet and two curb cuts when road frontage is over 200 feet. All truck loading docks and areas shall be visually screened from public view. No loading or unloading docks or areas shall be permitted on the airside of buildings. All loading and unloading areas shall be designed to enable all truck maneuvering to occur in the parking area, not on the street system. Open storage in loading and unloading areas is prohibited. Loading and unloading areas shall be identified in the site plan. Airside shall be the side of the building that is located the closest to the airport runway. 
(o)	Roads. All roads shall be paved with asphalt concrete, designed and engineered to comply with Jackson County Standard Detail T-05. 
(p)	Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground and located in the right-of-way adjacent to the road and should comply with the Jackson County Standard Detail T-08. Each lot shall connect to the utilities and service pedestals or boxes located outside of the roadway sight lines. The area around the service pedestal or boxes shall be kept clear of permanent structures. Landscape irrigation shall be designed in such a manner that water is not directly thrown or sprayed on the pedestals or boxes. Temporary power poles are permissible while the primary structure is being constructed, but shall be removed prior to the time the Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.) is issued. Power poles shall not be placed within the roadway sight lines. 
(q)	Refuse collection area. All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be visually screened from public view, adjacent properties, and the airfield by an opaque screen utilizing the same or similar materials as the main building it serves. The location of refuse collection areas and materials used for screening shall be designated on the site plan. 
(r)	Antennas and satellite dishes. No antenna or satellite dish for transmissions or reception of television signals or any other form of electromagnetic radiation shall be erected, used, or maintained outside any building, whether attached to an improvement or otherwise, without the prior written approval of the Airport Authority. 
(s)	Lighting. The exterior of any building shall be lit for security purposes. Wall mounted fixtures may be utilized. However, all lighting figures shall be shielded to prevent spillage of excessive light onto the adjacent leased lot within the AOA or the adjacent property to the airport. The maximum allowable lighting intensity for exterior areas is 10 footcandles (FC), with no more than 1 FC at the leased lot line within the AOA or the adjacent property to the airport. Plans for lighting shall be submitted to both the Airport Authority and Jackson County Public Development for approval. Lighting in parking areas shall be a uniform style throughout the Jackson County Airport, as shown in Figure "A", see section 606(e) for type. Where pedestrian walkways are not adequately illuminated by street lighting or parking lot lighting, uniform walkway lights shall be used consistent with the style and design of the street lighting system. Any plaza, courtyard, terrace, or other exterior pedestrian area adjacent to buildings or incorporated as part of the individual site plan shall use lighting compatible with the lighting styles of the walkway and parking area. Architectural lighting shall be restricted to concealed up lighting or down lighting. Such lighting shall be restrained in design and levels of illumination so as not to be a hazard to Airport operations. The entrances to the primary structure shall be lighted with a fixture directly overhead of the door(s). Lighting shall be provided from the primary entrance of the building to the parking lot by one of two methods: a pole mounted fixture no more than 12 feet in height to the top of the fixture, or bollards no more than 42 inches in height. Parking lot lighting shall be accommodated on a pole mounted fixture no more than 30 feet tall to the top of the fixture, and shall be painted black. See section 606(e). Lighting shall not interfere with aircraft operations. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2c, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 518. - Aircraft wash racks. 
(a)	Aircraft wash racks shall be equipped with oil/water separators and oil catch tanks to prevent fuel oil, or other petroleum based products from being discharged into the storm water or sanitary sewer system. Waste disposal and sanitary system plans shall be provided to the Airport Authority. 
(b)	Runoff from washing operations and rinsing of aircraft shall be collected separately from other storm water. The wastewater ("gray water") shall be piped to the sanitary sewer wastewater facility if no sanitary sewer is available within 1,500 feet. Use of septic tank will be permitted if approved through Jackson County Environmental Health Department. 
(c)	All facilities shall obtain necessary federal, state, and local jurisdiction permits. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2d, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 519. - Individual aircraft storage hangars. 
(a)	Individually owned aircraft storage hangars are defined as those buildings that are designed solely for storage of one or more aircraft. No commercial maintenance activity may be conducted in these buildings except through written agreement with the Airport Authority. 
(b)	Location—Individual aircraft storage hangars may be situated only in those areas of the Airport specified for aviation use. 
(c)	Setbacks—All new proposed hangars should have a minimum of ten-foot setback between hangars and a minimum of 40-foot setback from any non airport property. 
(d)	Hangar doors may be of sliding, rolling, or bi-fold type. The hangar door shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide with a minimum of 15 feet vertical clearance when open. A personnel door shall also be provided. 
(e)	All hangars shall be provided with electrical service, lighting, smoke detectors, and fire extinguishers. 
(f)	Hangars shall be provided with exterior (building mounted) lighting and an exterior hose bib. See Section 517(s). 
(g)	Units must be permanent. No portable type hangars will be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2e, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 520. - T Hangars. 
(a)	T hangars are defined as consisting of a multiple number of individual T shaped bays or units (four minimum), each suitable for the storage of a single aircraft. 
(b)	Location—T hangars may be situated only in those areas of the Airport specified for aviation use. 
(c)	Units must be permanent. No portable type hangars will be permitted. 
(d)	Hangar doors may be of sliding, rolling, or bi-fold type. The hangar door shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide with a minimum of ten feet vertical clearance when open. For hangar bays larger than 2,000 square feet, a personnel door shall be provided. 
(e)	All hangars shall be provided with electrical service, lighting, smoke detectors, and fire extinguishers. 
(f)	Setbacks—All new proposed hangars should have a minimum of ten-foot setback between hangars and a minimum of 40-foot setback from any non airport property. 
(g)	Hangars shall be provided with exterior (building mounted) lighting and an exterior hose bib. See Section 517(s). 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2f, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 521. - Aircraft maintenance hangars. 
(a)	Aircraft maintenance hangars are those facilities providing avionics, instrument, propeller, or other aircraft component or airframe and engine maintenance or repair services. 
(b)	Location—Aircraft maintenance hangars may be situated only in those areas of the Airport specified for aviation use. 
(c)	Minimum Space Requirements—Building improvements shall include a minimum of 3,000 SF of space. Apron areas shall equal or exceed the total hangar floor area. 
(d)	Improvements shall include a minimum of 600 SF of space for offices and restroom facilities. 
(e)	Hangar doors may be of sliding, rolling, or bi-fold type. However, sliding doors may not be used in hangar configurations where the open door of one hangar interferes with access to an adjacent hangar. Hangar doors shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide and with a minimum of 15 feet of vertical clearance when open. A personnel door shall be provided. 
(f)	All hangars shall also be provided with electrical service, lighting, smoke detectors, and fire extinguishers. 
(g)	Paved aircraft apron space shall accommodate the maximum number and type of aircraft that can be stored within the hangar(s) at any one time. 
(h)	Setbacks—All new proposed hangars should have a minimum of ten-foot setback between hangars and a minimum of 40-foot setback from any non airport property. 
(i)	Hangars shall be provided with exterior (building mounted) lighting and an exterior hose bib. See Section 517(s). 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2g, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 522. - Airport Fixed Base Operations (FBO). 
(a)	Fixed Base Operations are those facilities that accommodate fixed base operator (FBO) activities related to general aviation operations, including fueling services, pilot instruction, aircraft parking, and amenities for pilots and passengers. 
(b)	The FBO shall operate in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract agreement between the FBO and the Airport Authority. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2h, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 523. - General aviation aprons and taxi lanes. 
(a)	General Aviation aprons and taxi lanes leading into aprons, lighting, signage and markings shall comply with all FAA rules and regulations. 
(b)	Pavement sections on all aprons and taxi lanes leading into aprons shall be designed to accommodate aircraft within Aircraft Rating Category CII, Aircraft Category II. 
(c)	All aircraft pavements shall be constructed using FAA and/or GDOT approved materials. 
(d)	Apron grades shall be consistent with minimum local drainage requirements, but shall be limited to a maximum grade of 1.0 percent to facilitate the towing and taxiing of aircraft. 
(e)	Apron grades shall be designed to direct drainage away from buildings. 
(f)	Catch inlets shall be installed within the pavement limits to facilitate the drainage to the storm water management system where necessary. 
(g)	Taxi lane edge lights shall be installed. All airfield lighting electrical installations/connections shall be coordinated with and must be approved by the Airport Authority prior to installation. 
(h)	The apron shall be marked and striped consistent with standards outlined by the FAA. 
(i)	Setbacks and clearances shall comply with those standards outlined in FAA AC 150/5300-13, Airport Design, for the aircraft types operating or anticipated to operate on the apron. 
(j)	Designated thoroughfares for fueling, maintenance, and other ground service vehicles shall direct vehicular traffic to reduce conflict with aircraft movements. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2i, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 524. - Office and warehouse facilities. 
(a)	Helicopter parking facilities shall be in accordance with FAA AC 150/5390-2B current revision, Heliport Design. 
(b)	Facilities shall be designed to accommodate based and transient helicopter operations in accordance with Section 30 of FAA AC 150/5390-2B current revision. 
(c)	Facilities shall be centrally located and contiguous on a dedicated portion of the general aviation apron, along the apron edge at a distance from airplanes to preclude or minimize the impact of helicopter rotor wash on parked airplanes or passengers, to provide appropriate clearances, and to minimize debris and dust concerns to other aircraft as well as adjoining soil erosion in the apron area. 
(d)	The smallest paved dimension for each helicopter parking position shall measure at least 1.5 times the length of the undercarriage for the design helicopter, with the actual width of each position being the rotor diameter of either the largest civilian helicopter in use as of the date that the plans are approved, or the largest helicopter determined to be accommodated at that particular facility. 
(e)	There shall be a minimum of 30 feet of separation between the edges of adjacent parking positions. 
(f)	All helicopter parking positions shall consist of concrete paving. 
(g)	A painted yellow line shall define the centerline of each helicopter parking position. A parking position is further identified by a 12-inch wide (30 cm) yellow line defining a circle. The diameter of the circle is equal to the rotor diameter of either the largest civilian helicopter in use as of the date that the plans are approved, or the largest helicopter determined to be accommodated at that particular facility. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2j, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 525. - Office and warehouse facilities. 
(a)	Improvements shall include a minimum of 20,000 SF of space for all buildings as well as a minimum of 1,000 SF of properly lighted and conditioned space for offices and related uses. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2k, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 526. - Fuel storage facilities. 
(a)	Fixed fuel storage systems shall contain safety fixtures and filtration systems that meet airline industry standards. The system shall have at least 10,000 gallons of above ground storage for each type of fuel to be provided. The storage system shall include adequate fuel spill prevention features and containment capabilities. A Fuel Spill Prevention Countermeasures and Control (SPCC) Plan must also be submitted to the Airport Authority for approval. 
(b)	Tank Location. All fuel shall be stored in aboveground tanks approved by the Airport Authority, with setbacks from buildings and roads as required by the NFPA. No underground storage facilities shall be permitted. Distribution of fuel into aircraft shall be via self fueling stationary or mobile pumping equipment. No fueling via portable gas cans is allowed. 
(c)	Fuel Storage Tanks. 
(1)	Separate storage tanks and fuelers shall be provided for each grade of fuel distributed. Tanks and mechanical equipment must be labeled and color coded per FAA requirements to distinguish the different fuel grades. Deadman controls shall be provided for unloading fuel from the tanks into the tending vehicles. 
(2)	Minimum storage tank size shall be 10,000 gallons each for aviation fuel including Jet A and Avgas. 
(3)	All aboveground tanks shall be installed in a concrete containment basin designed to capture any accidental spill of the contents of the fuel storage facility and/or delivery vehicle in accordance with all EPA, NFPA, and other federal, state, and local laws and regulations as amended. Emergency fuel shutoff stations shall be located near the fuel tanks, and shall be accessible, well marked, and lit as per AC 150/5230-4A. 
(4)	All surface drainage from the storage area and docking/loading area shall be captured in a closed drainage system and directed through a fuel spill and/or oil water separator device. 
(5)	At a minimum, aboveground storage facilities shall be diked with an impervious retention basin capable of containing 110 percent of the capacity of the largest tank and shall be either double lined or vaulted. 
(6)	Fuel storage equipment shall be provided with metering devices that maintain and produce accurate receipts of fuel dispensed from the facility and are calibrated and approved by the State of Georgia Department of Agriculture, Division of Weights and Measures. Specifications for the metering equipment shall be submitted to the Airport Authority for review and approval. Fueling equipment and procedures shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations as amended. 
(7)	Design and construction drawings and specifications shall be approved by the Airport Authority and Jackson County Public Development. 
(d)	Safety. All fueling facilities shall conform to published safety standard. 
(1)	Facility shall be posted with "Flammable—No Smoking" signs conforming to NFPA standards. 
(2)	Facility shall: 
a.	Contain no feature that would allow introduction of any foreign material into fuel. 
b.	Be free of materials, equipment, functions, and activities that would be ignition sources. 
c.	Be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the introduction of the product into the wrong storage tank. 
d.	Be constructed with lightning protection in accordance with NFPA standards. 
(3)	Facility shall be equipped with protection for electrical equipment and wiring. This shall provide reasonable protection from heat, abrasion, or other impact that could cause failure of insulation, open spark, or other ignition source. See NFPA Standard 70, National Electrical Code. 
(4)	Grounding and bonding equipment should provide that piping, filters, tanks, and electrical components are electrically bonded together and interconnected for adequate electrical ground. 
(5)	Twenty pound Class B fire extinguishers shall be readily available to the operator of fueling equipment, in conformance with NFPA standards. 
(6)	All hoses, nozzles, filters, and connectors shall meet or exceed recommendations in FAA AC 150/5230-A4. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2l, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 527. - Airport facility parking requirements. 
(a)	Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for each building. Parking shall be designed in a safe and coordinated manner for the entire site. The parking area shall be integrated and designed so as to enhance the visual appearance of the property. Parking areas and spaces shall be identified on the site plan. Specific requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Parking spaces shall be 10 ft. × 20 ft. Parking lot design shall be developed throughout the site to provide efficient and safe means of traffic and pedestrian circulation. 
(2)	No parking shall be permitted in streets. 
(3)	All parking areas shall be paved. 
(4)	The number of spaces will be determined by the type and intensity of use, and will be consistent with Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
(5)	Landscaping and lighting of parking areas are addressed by the general landscape requirements and site lighting requirements in Section 517(s) and 529. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2m, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 528. - Signage. 
(a)	All signs shall fit aesthetically into the landscape with a simple, coordinated signage and graphic system. The goal is to contribute to the overall design unity of the project. 
(b)	A signage plan shall be submitted at the time of site plan submittal. Location, size, dimension, materials/finishing, and lighting shall be indicated. All signage shall be located out of roadway visibility sight line triangles. No signs shall be erected anywhere on the Airport property except within the premises leased by the lessee. 
(c)	A sign permit must be applied for and approved by Jackson County Building Department prior to installation. 
(d)	Regulatory Signage. Regulatory signage in the area will be used to define emergency access, such as fire zones, service vehicle areas, and handicapped accessible areas. It is meant to define specific points that are limited to overall use. The Airport Authority shall review and approve the regulatory signage at time of site plan review. 
(e)	Temporary Signage. Temporary signage is transient in nature and disposable and shall be removed after 30 calendar days. Temporary signs shall not exceed 48 square feet. The placement of the sign shall not be on public property or in a roadway visibility triangle. The removal of the sign shall be the sole responsibility of the person or company sponsoring the event. 
(f)	Permitted Signs. 
(1)	Wall signs—Placed on the façade of the primary structure. 
(2)	Ground signs—Located between the front façade of the building and the right-of-way. Ground signs are limited to monument design. 
(3)	Awning signs—Located over the primary entrance of the building. 
(g)	Prohibited Signs. 
(1)	Prohibited signs include the following and are not eligible for a special exception: 
a.	Beacons or flashing lights. 
b.	Signs exceeding 200 square feet. 
c.	Any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence post, or any other similar object. 
d.	Portable signs. 
e.	Any sign that encompasses an inflatable animal, person, or object. 
f.	Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals. 
g.	Advertising flags or banners. 
h.	Signs placed on vehicles or trailers, which are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign. 
i.	Signs that create traffic or pedestrian hazards. 
j.	Signs erected on public property including public right-of-way by a private entity. 
(h)	Color. Color for the pedestal material shall be limited to earth tones or black. Background colors for the sign shall be limited to neutral shades of brown, beige, and gray. Corporate colors may be used on company logos and shall not exceed 25 percent of the total sign area. Fluorescent colors are prohibited from use. 
(i)	Illumination. Illumination of the sign, either internally or externally, is permitted. The source of the externally illuminated sign shall be installed so that it is arranged or screened as to not shine, glare, or adversely impact aircraft operations, adjacent properties, or roadways. The use of fiber optics and neon is permitted. Blinking and strobe lights are prohibited. Rotating illuminated signs are prohibited. 
(j)	Materials. Materials for signs are limited to brick, masonry block, and finished concrete for the pedestal. The face of the sign may be masonry, finished concrete, composite material (plastic), or metal. All finishes shall be matte or a non reflective finish. 
(k)	Size. Ground signs shall be limited to one sign for each primary street frontage. The maximum allowable height is eight feet. The height shall be measured from the finished grade or the roadway, whichever is higher, to the top of the sign face. Wall signs shall be attached to the primary façade of the building. 
(l)	Landscaping for Signage. A landscape planting area at a minimum of 100 SF in size shall be provided around the base of any ground sign. The landscape shall include shrubs and groundcover. Emphasis on a simple planting plan with feature plants is encouraged. The landscaped area shall be irrigated with 100 percent coverage and located on a separate zone, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2n, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 529. - Landscape development standards. 
(a)	General landscape requirements. 
(1)	A landscape plan shall be part of every facility proposal. A landscape and irrigation plan, at a scale of 1"=20' to 1"=40', shall be submitted, along with the development plans by the tenant to the Airport Authority for approval. 
(2)	All landscaping shall be in compliance with Federal Aviation Regulations height restrictions, and where used for noise control, shall conform to FAA rules and regulations for Airport Landscaping for Noise Control Purposes. 
(3)	All surfaces on the property shall be covered by building, pavement, plantings/groundcover, or grass. Hangars and buildings contained entirely within the airfield/AOA fence are exempt. No plantings are required inside the fence, unless specifically permitted by the Airport. No planters or plant containers shall be allowed inside the AOA, due to prop and/or jet blast hazard. No manmade or natural objects shall be allowed that create height hazards or obstructions. 
(4)	All non-pervious areas shall be landscaped. A minimum of 10 percent of the total lease area shall be landscaped. All front yards shall be landscaped with acceptable trees, shrubs, or ground covers other than grass. 
(5)	In general, landscaping shall be distributed evenly on site. Each side of the building (north, south, east, and west) is encouraged to have a proportion of the landscaping approximately equal to the amount of open area available to plant, except the side that faces onto the airfield. Landscaping is encouraged to screen and/or enhance parking lots, blank walls, and refuse bin areas. 
(6)	For grassed areas, millet seed is prohibited. Plants incorporated into the landscape design must be chosen for their structure, texture, color, and ultimate growth in harmony with and complimentary to the building and other materials. Plants shall meet the size requirements set forth by the landscape architect or designer at the time of installation to create an immediate; design impact. Fruit-bearing plants that attract flocks of birds are prohibited while the use of native plants is highly encouraged. 
(7)	Any proposed "water holding" structure (such as reflection ponds, pools, fountains, etc. that would provide freshwater for birds and wildlife) should be designed so as not to be a hazard to aircraft. 
(8)	Planting areas shall drain within themselves, not onto paved pedestrian surfaces. Percolation tests shall be used as a basis for installation of yard drains in planted areas. 
(9)	All graded areas shall be fertilized, seeded with suitable approved ground cover, and mulched. 
(10)	All landscaped and grassed areas shall be maintained at all times. Any shrub or ground cover that is ½ dead shall be replaced during the next appropriate planning season for that species of plant. Any tree containing 2/3 of dead branches shall be replaced during the next appropriate planning season for that species of tree. Any replacement plant shall be the same size as the dead plant, so as to have the appearance that it is not a new addition to the landscaping. 
(b)	Planting requirements. 
(1)	Canopy trees shall be planted a minimum of 25 feet apart, or greater in order to prevent overlapping of canopies at maturity. Canopy tree lined streets are encouraged and may be planted in the right-of-way providing they are a minimum of 15 feet from the paved roadway edge. The minimum size of canopy trees shall be three inches caliper. 
(2)	Landscaping shall not be located in an area that may interfere with visibility of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Plantings, other than grass, shall be restricted around fire hydrants so as not to obstruct access. 
(c)	Buffer requirements. A buffer is required along all landside property boundaries. Airside boundary buffers are encouraged but not mandatory. Buffer requirements shall conform to those outlined in Jackson County Unified Development Codes. 
(d)	Parking lots. Landscaping shall be provided between all property lines and such off street parking and vehicular use areas. All landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by a six-inch ribbon curb for all roads, and mounded curb, wheel stops, or other similar divides for parking and loading/unloading areas. Parking lots in excess of five parking spaces shall provide interior landscaped areas in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)	Strategic placement of landscaped areas shall divide and break up the expanse of paving and guide traffic flow and direction. 
(2)	There shall be a landscaped island at the end of each parking row with no more than 10 parking spaces being consecutive without being separated by a landscaping island. Each landscape island shall have a minimum dimension of 10 feet × 20 feet. These landscaped islands shall include with at least one tree, and a minimum of 50 percent shrub coverage, the remaining area to be sodded or planted with groundcover. 
(3)	Each row of parking spaces shall terminate in a required landscaped area. 
(4)	Trees shall have their limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner so that no part of the plant extends into the cross visibility area, thus creating a traffic hazard. Trees shall have a clear trunk area to a height of six feet. Landscaping, except required grass or groundcover, shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of any access way pavement. 
(5)	Entry drives into parking areas shall be landscaped in a manner that incorporates the design with adjoining buffer areas. The landscape shall visually emphasize the parking area and offer to drivers and pedestrians an attractive appearance from the street which relates to the building landscape entry. 
(6)	Medians between parking bays shall be landscaped with no less than two approved trees per 50 linear feet. Medians shall also be planted with a minimum of 50 percent coverage of shrubs, the remainder being sodded or planted with groundcover. Medians that incorporate sidewalks shall integrate the landscaping with the layout of the walkway and shall be subject to the same restrictions as other parking area medians. The area of walkways shall be excluded from computations regarding the minimal 50 percent coverage of shrubs. 
(7)	Islands at the ends of parking bays shall be landscaped in the same fashion as medians, with at least one approved tree per island and a minimum of 50 percent coverage of shrubs, the remainder being sodded or planted with groundcover. 
(8)	All parking islands and medians shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by six-inch mounded curbs. Tree and lighting locations shall be designed so as not to conflict with one another. Trees shall be planted a minimum of 15 feet from light poles. 
(e)	Building open areas. 
(1)	Front areas (areas in view by the public) of the buildings shall present an attractive appearance emphasizing and reinforcing the major entry of the structure. The landscaping shall incorporate a mix of approved trees, shrubs, and groundcover in a design appropriate to the scale and design of the building, as mandated by the Jackson County Unified Development Code. A pleasing mix of shrubs and groundcover shall be planted across the front façade of the building, exclusive of walks, entries, and courtyards extending beyond the immediate front façade. Trees shall be incorporated into the landscape design of the front areas to provide shade and accent, and to frame the main entry of the building at a ratio of one tree per 800 SF of open front area. Additional shrubbery and groundcover in areas beyond the required foundation planting are encouraged and shall be incorporated into the overall landscape plan. 
(2)	Side areas of the buildings shall be incorporated into and continue the landscape design of the front area. A mix of shrubs and groundcover shall be used as foundation plants across the entire façade of these areas, exclusive of walks, entries, and courtyards. Trees shall also be incorporated into the landscaping to enhance the building and provide shade at a ratio of one tree per 1,000 SF of open space. 
(3)	Rear areas of the buildings shall be landscaped with appropriate foundation plantings across all façades in normal public view. All service areas, drives, and service entrances shall be adequately screened with appropriate plant material. This will present a totally screened appearance to persons entering or leaving the building through all public entrances or exits and to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the roadways adjacent to the parcel. Trees shall be provided in rear yards and service areas at a ratio of one tree per 1,000 SF. Trees shall be prohibited in restricted areas stipulated in FAA standards. 
(4)	All perimeter landscaping shall be located adjacent to the building façade, including entrance areas, plazas, and courtyards. There shall be a minimum of two feet between the building façade and the intended maintained edge of the plants installed. Building perimeters shall be planted at a minimum ratio of 100 SF of planting beds per 1,000 SF of building ground floor area. 
(5)	The use of planters is recommended in small spaces where a height change and landscape relief is desirable. Seating courtyards, eating areas, and plazas incorporated within the landscape design are highly encouraged to provide a friendly atmosphere to employees and guests. If used, raised planters shall be waterproof and have proper irrigation and drainage provided, as well as hose bibs in case of irrigation failure. At a minimum, planters shall be 18 inches wide and 10 SF for shrub planters and 30 inches wide and 25 SF for small tree planters. Canopy trees are prohibited from planters. All planters should have 14 [to] 16-inch depth of potting soil and four-inch drainage layer. Planters shall be constructed of materials that are complimentary to their surroundings. 
(f)	Plant material selection. 
(1)	In any plant composition, there shall be a predominance of material, color, or texture to provide unity. Accent material shall be introduced to play against the dominant material and create contrast. Overlay varied species selection will potentially weaken the planting design, where as simple masses with a predominant species create unity and flow. 
(2)	Two species of tree planting shall occur per street. One species shall be used as the dominant street tree and another to emphasize intersections or provide a pattern. 
(3)	The minimum installed tree size requirement is three-inch caliper. The caliper of multi trunk trees shall be calculated using the total caliper of all trunks. Under story trees shall have a minimum one and a half-inch caliper. Hedges shall have a minimum height of 24 inches at time of planting, and shall be 36 inches within one year of planting. When a continuous hedge is required the plants shall be planted at a maximum spacing of 36 inches. Upon installation, all plants shall be trimmed as needed to preserve their health and vigor, as well as their natural and aesthetic form, by removal of dead wood and damaged or diseased limbs, rubbing branches, and dense interior growth. 
(4)	All side landscaping trees will be composed of non-deciduous trees only. The maximum height at maturity can't exceed 40 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 2o, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 530. - East Jackson Corridor Overlay District Boundaries. 
This Article applies to land in unincorporated Jackson County along Hwy 15 Alt, Hwy 441, Hwy 98, Hwy 334, and Hwy 326 identified as the East Jackson Corridor Overlay District as depicted on the Official Jackson County Zoning Map. All property contained within any parcel is subject to this Section on the adoption date of this Ordinance and shall continue to be subject to this Section, even if the parcel is subdivided in the future. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 531. - Effect of East Jackson Corridor Overlay District Provisions. 
(a)	Application. This Overlay District is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in this code governing all properties and approvals within this Overlay District. The provisions of this Article shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations and other Jackson County ordinances. The Public Development Director is authorized to promulgate and enforce such rules, regulations, guidelines, and standards as may be reasonably necessary or desirable to give effect to the provisions of this Article. 
(b)	Relationship to underlying Zoning District Standards and other Provisions of this code. In any case where the standards and requirements of the Overlay District conflict with those of the base-zoning district or with other provisions of this code, the standards and requirements of the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c)	Exceptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Completion of work subject to preliminary plats, site development plans, construction plans, building permits, or interior finish permits approved prior to the effective date of this Article. 
(2)	Improvements and additions that are made to a single-family residence previously permitted and built on a lot of record prior to enactment of this Article. 
(3)	Construction of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record within a single-family residential subdivision with final plat approved prior to enactment of this Article, provided that the new construction shall be of a similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. 
(4)	Construction, rehabilitation, restoration, repair of a non-residential structure, interior renovations or interior finishes within an existing structure, or addition to an existing non-residential structure that was permitted prior to the enactment of this Article shall not be subject to the provisions of the East Jackson Corridor Overlay District, provided that such construction is on a lot of record and does not affect a change to more than 20 percent of the existing permitted structure or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(5)	Agriculturally zoned property (PCFD, A-1, A-2, A-3 and AR). At the time of rezoning the existing structures shall be required to be upgraded, altered, or removed to meet the standards of this Overlay District. 
(d)	Building Plan Application. 
(1)	All building plans must be submitted with the development plan for review. Approval must be granted by Public Development prior to submission to the building department for review. 
(2)	All building plans submitted pursuant to an application for approval should clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each façade as described in Section 532(k). 
(3)	The plans should clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per façade. 
(4)	Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 532. - Property development standards. 
(a)	Special Uses. The following uses shall require special use approval in accordance with the procedures of Article 12 if not otherwise required by the Zoning District. 
(1)	Self service storage or mini-warehouse facilities. 
(2)	Salvage, junk, wrecking and scrap yards. 
(3)	Adult bookstore. 
(4)	Sexually oriented businesses or establishments. 
(5)	Pawnshop or loan brokers, other than mortgage loan brokers. 
(6)	Rooming and boarding houses. 
(7)	Outdoor storage or display. 
(8)	Commercial buildings in excess of 150,000 square feet. 
(9)	Industrial buildings in excess of 500,000 square feet. 
(10)	Exceptions to building height standards as set forth in Subsection 532(k)(6) below. 
(b)	Ground Floor Area Limitation. New commercial buildings may not exceed 150,000 gross square feet in ground floor area unless approved by the Board of Commissioners as a Special Use approval. New industrial buildings may not exceed 500,000 gross square feet in ground floor area unless approved by the Board of Commissioners as a Special Use approval. In determining whether to grant an increase in ground floor size beyond the standards, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following factors, in addition to those listed in Article 12: 
(1)	The site has safe, immediate access to a public maintained collector roadway as applicable. 
(2)	The building site will provide convenient inter-connections with adjacent uses and properties that serve both pedestrians and automobiles. 
(3)	The floor area of the proposed building is the smallest feasible to serve the function of the proposed use. 
(4)	The architectural design of the building reduces the perceived size of the building by appropriate articulations and variations in the massing, façade, roofline, materials, colors, and textures of the building exterior. 
(5)	The building and site meets or exceeds all other standards set forth in this ordinance and by the Jackson County Unified Development Code. 
(c)	Lot Standards. 
(1)	Minimum lot size shall be 1 acre for out parcels or stand-alone commercial projects. 
(2)	Minimum lot size shall be 2 acres for out parcels or stand-alone industrial projects. 
(3)	Minimum commercial or industrial lot frontage: 175 feet. 
(4)	Non-residential lots shall be generally rectangular with a ratio of depth to frontage not greater than 4:1. 
(5)	Residential subdivisions shall comply with one of the following two requirements: (see Section 534, Figure 1) 
a.	Reverse-fronting lots are required for residential subdivisions along streets classified as arterials or collectors, subject to subparagraph (b) below. Reverse-frontage residential lots shall be platted with a non-encroachable landscaped easement restricting vehicular access and shall be placed adjacent to the public right-of-way as required by Section 806 of this code. Such easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in depth and include one of the following: 
1.	A continuous 4-foot high solid wall constructed entirely of brick or stone masonry. 
2.	A 4-foot high fence constructed of a combination of brick or stone masonry pillars with iron pickets. 
3.	A vegetated strip of canopy trees, shrubs, and groundcover that provide a full landscape buffer. 
b.	If a residential lot is separated from the arterial or collector street by a minimum 20-foot wide landscaped strip and a residential street, a residential lot may face an arterial or a collector street. 
(d)	Access Management Standards. 
(1)	Driveways. Driveway connections to public streets shall be consistent with the following standards: 
a.	Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the controlled access zone of an intersection. (See Section 534, Figure 2) 
b.	Out parcels with less than 200 feet of road frontage are restricted to access from within commercial or industrial developments only. 
c.	Driveways that enter a thoroughfare at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes (one for each turning direction) of at least 11 feet in width, and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 11 feet. 
d.	No residentially developed property may have a curb cut in excess of 30 feet in width, and no non-residential property may have a curb cut in excess of 40 feet without approval of the Public Development Director. Standards in Section 1013 shall be followed. 
e.	Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
f.	Except where driveways are on opposite sides of a raised median, driveways on opposite sides of a street shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet, as measured between the extended centerlines of such driveways. 
g.	Whenever possible, driveways on undivided arterial, collector, or local streets should align with driveways (if any) on the opposite side of such street. 
h.	On a divided arterial street that includes a median, driveways should align with median breaks whenever possible. Driveways not meeting this standard shall be limited to right turn ingress access and right turn egress. 
i.	Driveway throat length. The length of a driveway or "throat length" for a non-residential development shall be designed in accordance with the vehicle storage required for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing unsafe conflicts with on-site vehicle circulation. The throat lengths specified in Table 5.4 are generally acceptable guidelines intended for the major entrance driveway of a commercial development. (see Section 534, Figure 3) 
Table 5.4: Driveway Throat Length for Commercial or Industrial Centers 

 
*For driveways that allow right turns only the throat length may be reduced by one third. 
(2)	Deceleration Lanes. 
a.	A major driveway entering a street with a regulated arterial speed greater than 35 miles per hour shall be required to provide a deceleration lane consistent with the standards set forth in Sections 1013 and 1014 of this code. 
b.	An acceleration or deceleration lane that would begin or end within 75 feet of another driveway or intersecting street shall be lengthened so that it connects with the adjacent street or driveway. 
(e)	Landscaped Strip to Screen Parking Lots and Loading Areas. 
(1)	Where a parking lot or loading area for a commercial, industrial, or institutional use is located adjacent to the public right-of-way, it shall be screened from the public right-of-way consistent with Section 809 of this code. 
(2)	Setbacks for screening areas facing the East Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be based on future right-of-way consistent with Section 534, Figure 5. 
(f)	Environmental Controls. 
(1)	Stormwater management design shall comply in all respects with the Jackson County Unified Development Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(g)	Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be required as in Article 6 of this code, except as provided in this subsection: 
(1)	Maximum number of parking spaces. The maximum number of parking spaces that may be constructed on impervious surfaces shall be no more than 105 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces. Parking spaces in excess of 105 percent shall be constructed on pervious surfaces recommended in paragraph 4(b) of this subsection. 
(2)	Pedestrian circulation. Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. Commercial and multi-family developments shall provide designated pedestrian pathways or sidewalks connecting the front entrance of the principal building to the sidewalk along the abutting street, including marked crosswalks across interior driveways. (See Section 534, Figures 4 & 5) 
(3)	Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking areas shall incorporate landscaped areas as required in Article 6 of this code. Such landscaped areas shall cover at least 12 percent of the parking area. 
(4)	Paving materials for parking lots. 
a.	All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete as required in Section 607 of this code, or consists of a pervious material approved by the Public Development Director. 
b.	Pervious paving. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in Volume 2 - Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the Porous Concrete or Modular Porous Paver Systems under the Limited Application Stormwater Structural Controls. 
c.	Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles as required in Sections 607 and 609. 
(5)	Shared parking. 
a.	The parking spaces provided for separate uses may be combined in one parking lot but the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
1.	Shared parking between day and night users (per peak parking requirements). One-half of the parking spaces assigned to a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
2.	Mixed use developments. Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Director of Public Development finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. The ratios on Table 5.5 may be used in determining the time of day and the day of the week at which the maximum number of spaces will be needed by the uses served by the shared parking facility. 
3.	Recordation of shared parking agreement. Shared parking arrangements must be committed to writing in an instrument acceptable to the Director of Public Development, and approved by the owners of each of the affected properties or uses. The instrument must be approved by the Director of Public Development and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court, and a copy of the recorded document must be supplied to the Director of Public Development. The document must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity. 
Table 5.5: Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period 

 
By way of example, the following illustrates shared parking calculations for a particular mixed-use development: 

 
Spaces Required applying the Peak Demand Percentages to the Example: 

 
Highest demand = 978 (instead of 1,340) 
(h)	Dumpsters. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be located where they are not visible from adjacent residentially-zoned and residentially used properties and shall be adequately screened from view from all other adjacent properties and streets. 
b.	Dumpsters shall be enclosed either within a building or out of sight from public streets or located outside to the rear of the principal building as provided in Section 805(b). 
c.	Dumpsters shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from all property lines. If a buffer is required on the subject property line, the dumpster shall not be located within the buffer or landscape strip. 
(2)	Pad. 
a.	Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
b.	Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
(i)	Hardscape. All hardscape accessory items, such as news boxes/racks, vending machines, ice machines, garbage cans, mailboxes, etc., shall be shielded from view of all adjacent agriculturally or residentially zoned properties and right-of-ways. 
(j)	Lighting. 
(1)	Streetlights. 
a.	Streetlights shall be provided on all public streets; provided, however, within the right-of-way of State Routes streetlights are not required. 
b.	The spacing of street lights shall be staggered, 150 feet on-center, along both sides of the roadway. 
c.	All street lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the Jackson County Public Development Department. 
d.	All roadway lighting and streetlights shall be full cut-off type. 
e.	Streetlights shall be consistent with Table 5.6 and Section 534, Figure 7. 
f.	The American National Standard Practice of Roadway Light of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American Standards Institute, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation. 
(2)	Parking Lot, Sidewalk, and Building Illumination. 
a.	Lighting shall be designed to prevent light spillover on to adjacent properties. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, or be cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward and does not cross any property line of the site. 
b.	Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, or color corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site. 
c.	Parking lot lights shall be the semi-cutoff type. 
d.	Parking lights shall be consistent with Table 5.6 and Section 534. 
Table 5.6: Lighting Specifications 

 
e.	Parking light fixtures shall be the box head type, shall have a maximum height of 35 feet, and shall employ a fluted pole. All parking light fixtures and poles shall be black. If the light fixture is taller than the building(s) being served additional screening and buffering must be used at the outer limits of the property to screen the light poles if the adjacent property(ies) is residentially or agriculturally zoned. 
(3)	Pedestrian Lights. 
a.	Semi cutoff luminaries shall be used for all pedestrian lighting. 
b.	The number of luminaries remaining on for security and pedestrian lighting shall not exceed one fourth the total number of each type of luminaries used for the maximum level of illumination, after dividing the total number by four, any remainder is counted as a whole number, which are located within a development (not including those along streets). 
c.	Pedestrian lights shall be consistent with Table 5.6 and Section 534. 
(4)	Drive-under Canopies and Pump Islands at Fueling Stations. The luminaries shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the luminaries does not extend below the ceiling. 
(k)	Architectural Standards. The following design guidelines and standards apply to all newly constructed buildings used for multifamily residential, office, commercial, or industrial purposes to include all accessory structures. These standards do not apply to single-family residential or duplex uses. 
(1)	General Architectural Requirements. 
a.	The use of a common palette of building materials should be maintained for building façades to create a consistent and traditional architectural identity. Traditional architecture shall include, for example, the use of brick, pitched roofs, low-profile signage, and subdued colors. For large commercial/retail buildings and multifamily buildings, variations in façade, roofline and depth should be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. All design and construction shall be subject to architectural review by the County or its designated architect to ensure adherence with this Section and that the structures present traditional architecture design. 
b.	All ground or roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence made of brick, stucco, or landscaping. 
c.	For all buildings, roof-mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within 300 feet) on all sides by a raised parapet or pitched roof along the edge of the roofline. 
d.	Contrasting accent colors on any single façade shall be limited to no more than 10 percent of the total wall area for any single façade. 
e.	Permanent mounted exposed exterior neon lights shall not be allowed. 
f.	Any exterior lighted bands shall be considered as part of the maximum 10 percent of contrasting accent colors as restricted under Section 532(k)(1)(d). 
g.	Buildings that are located within the same development shall be constructed of similar materials and colors to show continuity between all out parcels, accessory buildings, and principal building. 
h.	Roof-mounted lights, and/or roof-mounted flag poles are not permitted. 
i.	Satellite dishes shall be located and painted to blend with the background as much as practical. 
(2)	Building materials. Table 5.7 and this subsection outlines allowed building materials that may be used and combined to create a consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design: 
Table 5.7 

 
a.	Allowed Building Materials. 
1.	Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
2.	Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
3.	Split-face block/concrete masonry unit (CMU) is restricted to 10% of the surface area of the façade for non-residential uses and is prohibited for residential uses; 
4.	Tilt/architectural pre-cast concrete is permitted by Special Use approval with a design plan consistent with the surrounding development and area for non-residential uses and is prohibited for residential uses; 
5.	High grade stucco is restricted to 50% of the surface area of a façade for non-residential uses and is permitted for residential uses; 
6.	Natural wood and/or cement-based artificial wood siding are allowed only for residential buildings; 
7.	Glass is restricted to 50% of the surface area of a façade; 
8.	Exposed concrete block is prohibited. 
9.	Tile is prohibited. 
10.	Metal is restricted to use on the sides and rear of an industrial building to a maximum of 85% per building façade. The remaining percentage of the building façade must be brick or stone as allowed per Table 5.7. The front of the building (which could be multiple sides) shall be considered any façade that can be seen from a public or private roadway leading to or past the building. 
b.	Ratios and Amounts of Allowed Building Materials. 
1.	Accent/Trim Exterior Building Material. Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the façade of the building or for decorative elements, but shall not exceed 10% of total wall area per façade. 
2.	Façade Calculations. With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two primary building materials used. When stucco or glass is used as a building material for a façade, it is restricted to 50% of the total. The allowed façade materials shall not apply to entry doors and/or roll-up doors. 
c.	The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per façade. 
For example, a building has a front façade with a gross façade area of 1,200 square feet with 400 square feet consisting of windows and doors. Begin with 1,200 square feet for required building material calculations. A wall area of 1,200 square feet shall have no more than 600 square feet of stucco on the front façade [e.g. (1,200 X 50% = 600)]. The balance shall be brick or other allowed material. Trim or accent material may account for up to 10% or 120 square feet, whichever is less. 
d.	The support columns for drive under canopies for gasoline pumps shall be made of the same material as the primary building on the property and will match the trim and accent material. Trim or accent material may account for up to 10% or 120 square feet, whichever is less. Any signage on this structure shall be counted towards the 10% accent material maximum, in addition to having to meet signage requirements of this code. 
(3)	Roof Requirements. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory finished sheet metal. 
a.	Pitched Roofs. All buildings less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area must have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4:12. All one-story buildings less than 10,000 gross square feet must have a pitched roof (between 3:12 and 12:12); provided, however, that if a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof is required. Designers must provide a pitched roof on front and side of the building to screen the view of any flat roof. Arcades, drive-under canopies, porches, and other features must be designed with pitched roofs. 
b.	Mansard Roofs. Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum 12-foot vertical surface length. 
c.	Flat Roofs. Building materials for flat roofs shall meet the state building code requirements for non-residential buildings. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal. If factory finished metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be subdued to blend with other materials or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. All buildings and structures with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front façade(s) of such building or structure. There shall be roof articulations/offsets at a minimum of one per each 125 linear feet of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front façade is less than 125 linear feet of length, then a minimum of one roof articulation must occur. 
d.	Other. Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have flat roofs with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 
(4)	Arcade/Structural Canopy for Retail Use. For any multi-tenant commercial development, a covered arcade/structural canopy shall be provided along the front façade of the building. Arcades are covered walkways connected to the principal building. They should be a minimum of five feet in width and designed to provide covered areas for relief from the weather. Different arcade/structural canopy designs may be used for each individual tenant/business within a multi-tenant commercial development provided that they blend aesthetically with the front façade of the building and has the approval of the building owner and the Public Development Director. 
(5)	Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets or private street depending on the type of street that services the development. 
(6)	Building height. Any building of which 50 percent or more is located within 250 feet of the centerline of an arterial or Collector Street shall be no more than three stories in height. 
A relief from height restrictions shall only be allowed if special use approval is granted by the Board of Commissioners, in accordance with procedures in Article 12 of this code. In deciding whether to grant a height increase, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following factors, in addition to those listed in Section 1206: 
•  Proximity and relationship of the proposed building to other buildings that are more than three stories or 35 feet in height. 
•  Impact of the proposed building on single-family residences on nearby tracts. 
•  Topography and vegetation that screen the view of the proposed building. 
•  On-site screening and/or landscaped buffers. 
•  Provision of public open space in exchange for increased building height. 
•  The effect of additional building height on traffic congestion. 
•  Access of the site to the traffic pattern. 
•  Economic development opportunities for Jackson County. 
•  The necessity of greater building height to the function of the proposed use. 
•  The quality of the architectural design and its compatibility with its surroundings. 
•  The capability of the designated fire district to adequately handle a fire or other emergency situation for the proposed structure using existing equipment and personnel. 
(7)	Building massing and modulation for commercial buildings. (See Section 534, Figure 6) The massing of building façades longer than 150 feet that are approximately parallel to the right-of-way and oriented to a public street shall be modulated to increase visual interest, as follows. 
a.	Building façades that are less than 500 feet long shall be modulated at intervals no greater than 100 feet in length. 
b.	Building façades that are more than 500 feet long shall be modulated with intervals no greater than 20 percent of the length of the façade. 
(8)	Building massing and modulation for industrial buildings. The massing of building façades longer than 500 feet shall be screened for a right-of-ways and driveways with additional landscaping to break up the building or the building façade must be modulated with intervals as shown in Section 534, Figure 6. 
a.	Building façades that are greater than 500 feet facing either a public driveway or right-of-way must screen the building from view of the public by adding a four- to six-foot berm with landscaping to create a 12-foot high landscaped buffer. The combination of the berm and landscaping shall be measured from the bottom of the berm to the top of the average height of the landscaping. The landscaping must be a mixture of bushes and trees to add texture to appear to be naturally formed. 
(9)	No non-residential building shall have less than 2,000 square feet of heated floor space. 
(10)	Building design shall include minimum one-foot deep cornices along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least 10 feet along the sides of buildings. 
(11)	Building designs shall include a minimum two-foot high contrasting base, along the entire front façade of buildings and extending for a distance of at least 10 feet along the sides of buildings. 
(12)	Satellite Dish Antennae. No satellite dishes shall be permitted within view from public streets. 
(13)	Off-street loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be located in the rear of buildings and screened from view from adjacent property or streets. 
(l)	Signage. Except as provided in this subsection, signage shall comply with the regulations in Article 7 of this code. 
(1)	Freestanding and project entrance signs shall be limited to ground signs (monument signs). The base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
(2)	The maximum sign area of any ground sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
a.	Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial, including shared signs, on lots with more than 1 tenant shall be no greater than 100 square feet in sign area. 
b.	Ground signs on lots zoned commercial or industrial with 1 tenant shall be no greater than 50 square feet in sign area. 
(3)	Ground signs for lots zoned commercial or industrial, shall be limited to a height of no greater than 15 feet including the base and sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 533. - Public improvement standards. 
Public rights-of-way within East Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be improved in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)	Street Standards. Public rights-of-way located within the West Jackson Corridor Overlay District shall be classified by type (i.e. Highway Arterial, Arterial, Collector, Local, or Access) as described in this section and shall also be consistent with Section 534. Each type of roadway is based off of the existing speed limit at the time of development, as follows: 
(1)	Highway Arterial (See Section 534, Figure 8) 
a.	55 mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 200-foot right-of-way. 
c.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. 
3.	Landscaping. 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the highway arterial. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(2)	Arterial (See Section 534, Figure 9) 
a.	45 mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 150-foot right-of-way. 
c.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. 
3.	Landscaping. 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the arterial. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the arterial. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(3)	Collector (See Section 534, Figure 10): 
a.	35-mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 64-foot right-of-way. 
c.	Depending on adjacent land use, lanes shall conform to one of the following two options: 
1.	Two travel lanes at 12 feet with center turn lane at 14 feet in commercial areas. 
2.	Two travel lanes at 12 feet with turn lane at intersection and on-street parking provided between intersections for planned developments or residential areas. 
d.	24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Street lights and pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. 
3.	Landscaping. 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the collector. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(4)	Local Streets: (See Section 534, Figure 11) 
a.	25-mph design speed. 
b.	Minimum 50-foot right-of-way. 
c.	Two travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
d.	24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
e.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Street lights and pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the collector. 
3.	Landscaping. 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the local streets. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 513 for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the local streets. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(5)	Access Street (See Section 534, Figure 12) 
a.	Interior roadway within a commercial, industrial, or multifamily development; not to be maintained or owned by Jackson County. 
b.	15-mph design speed. 
c.	Minimum 50-foot right-of-way. 
d.	Two travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
e.	18-inch wide curb and gutter. 
f.	15-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip outside planned right-of-way (both sides of street), including: 
1.	A sidewalk a minimum of 6-foot wide meandering through landscape strip. 
2.	Street lights and pedestrian lights are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the access street. 
3.	Landscaping. 
(a)	Trees are required in landscaped strip on both sides of the access street. Spacing shall be determined by type of tree placed in landscape strip see Section 533(c) for permitted trees. Trees shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(b)	Shrubs are required at a rate of 1 shrub per 5 feet of road frontage to be placed within the landscape strip on both sides of the access street. Shrubs shall flank both sides of sidewalk. 
(6)	Any proposed or future roadway must meet the requirements above and shall be classified by the Public Development Director or designee. 
(7)	Underground utilities are required for all street frontages. Upon written application pursuant to Article 13, an exception may be granted by the Board of Adjustment in cases where, due to unique topography or the presence of rock, the installation of underground utilities would present a severe and unique hardship. 
(b)	Network Standards. 
(1)	Connectivity. Within all non-residential or multi-family developments or any single family residential development of 5 or more acres, the following standards shall apply unless a variance is sought and obtained from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Article 13 due to unusual topography or environmental constraints such as major streams and rivers that create a severe and unique hardship: 
a.	No local street may be longer than 600 feet without an intersection with another local through street. Cul-de-sac streets shall not count as through streets. (See Section 534, Figure 13) 
b.	Continuous pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect building entrances to required sidewalks along street frontage. 
c.	A cul-de-sac street that ends within 200 feet of the right-of-way of an adjacent collector or arterial street shall provide a 5-foot wide sidewalk in a 10-foot wide easement connecting the sidewalk on the cul-de-sac to the sidewalk on the adjacent collector or arterial street. 
d.	Dead-end streets, including cul-de-sac streets, shall not exceed 300 feet in length and shall not serve more than 30 dwelling units. 
(2)	Vehicular Access Points: Minimum number of driveways or streets required per Table 5.7 below. 
Table 5.7: Minimum Vehicular Access Points 

 
(3)	Utilization and Provision of Sub-arterial Street Connections to and from Adjacent Developments and Developable Parcels. 
a.	All development plans shall incorporate and continue all sub-arterial streets stubbed to the boundary of the development plan by previously approved development plans or existing development. 
b.	All development plans shall provide for future public street connections to adjacent developable parcels by providing a local street connection spaced at intervals not to exceed 600 feet along each development plan boundary that abuts potentially developable or re-developable land. 
c.	An easement agreement must be draft by the developer and/or property owner and approved by the Public Development Director prior to approval of development plans. Said agreement must allow access from neighboring developments as they currently exist or any future developments. Said agreement must also be noted on all development plans and the easement agreement must be recorded in the County Clerk's office. 
(4)	Interparcel Access. For developments along an arterial or collector street, except where a variance is sought and obtained from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Article 13 because of topographic or other site-specific constraints that create a unique and severe hardship, compatible developments, as determined by the Public Development Director, shall provide a network of non-residential access streets that meet the following: 
a.	Access streets shall be constructed for a commercial or multifamily residential development that abuts another commercial or multi-family residential development, whether existing or planned (according to either the zoning map and/or the future land use map). The development of the site shall incorporate the following: 
1.	Continuous non-residential access street, where necessary to connect adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
2.	Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access. 
b.	New commercial or multifamily property that abuts a planned, new or existing multifamily residential property shall provide for a 5-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two uses. The sidewalk as required shall be continued to the property line for future connectivity. 
c.	New multifamily residential development that abuts a planned, new or existing commercial property shall provide for a 5-foot wide sidewalk connecting the two uses. The sidewalk as required shall be continued to the property line for future connectivity. 
(5)	Crosswalks: 
a.	All intersections shall contain crosswalks that connect to sidewalks in all quadrants. Crosswalks shall not cross over a state highway or county arterial or collector roadway. 
b.	Crosswalks shall be either identified with high-reflectivity thermoplastic paint or brick pavers. 
(c)	Required Tree Species. Table 5.8 shall list the various tree species as applicable to the placement of such trees. Refer to Table 5.8 to get the scientific name, common name, required spacing, and permitted uses for required trees located within the West Jackson Overlay. 
(1)	No more than 25 percent of the trees installed may be of any one genus. 
(2)	No more than 50 percent of the street trees used in a single development shall be of the small tree species. 
(3)	Refer to the permitted uses in Table 5.8 for the permitted locations per tree species. Note that if there is, or will be per the development plan, a power line located above any tree location that the tree species labeled "under power lines" can be used in any location. 
Table 5.8 Large and Small Tree Species 

 
(d)	Improvement Guarantees. See Article 12 for Performance Bond & Maintenance Bond requirements. 
(Ord. No. 12-002, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 534. - Design guidelines. 
(a)	Property Development Standards. 












(Ord. No. 12-002, 3-19-2012) 
ARTICLE 6. - PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 601. - Purpose of Article 6. 
This Article presents the minimum standards for automobile parking for all land uses in the county, including design and construction standards, and for truck loading areas. See Article 5 for any overlay requirements. The overlay requirements shall supersede the requirements in this Article if the overlay does not address a requirement then this Article shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 602. - Off-street parking; when required. 
Permanent off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Article whenever any of the following occurs: 
(1)	At the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building. 
(2)	At the time of occupancy of a building by a new use. 
(3)	At the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area. 
Sec. 603. - Number of parking spaces required. 
(a)	Parking for residents, employees, customers and visitors. Space for the parking of motor vehicles must be provided on every property that contains a principal use, for the safety and convenience of the people who live or work on the property, shop or do business on the property, or otherwise visit the property in the normal course of activity of the principal use. 
(1)	Minimum number of parking spaces required. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for residents, employees, customers and visitors for each type of land use shall be determined by the following Table 6.1, rounded up to the nearest whole parking space. Developments containing two or more of the uses listed on Table 6.1 shall provide the number of spaces required for each use (except as may be reduced under Shared Parking, below). 
(2)	Maximum number of parking spaces allowed. The maximum number of parking spaces allowed on a nonresidential property for employees, customers and visitors shall not exceed 120% of the minimum number of parking spaces required, as determined for the type of land use by the following Table 6.1. 
(3)	For any use not shown on Table 6.1, the Director of Public Development shall determine the appropriate minimum and maximum parking requirements for the use based on the requirements for similar uses, the operating characteristics of the use, or such other data, surveys or information upon which the Director deems relevant. Such an interpretation shall be considered an "administrative decision" for the purposes of appeal under the provisions of Article 13 of this Development Code. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Parking for company-owned vehicles not included. Every business that stores vehicles owned by the business on site overnight (such as a company fleet), or maintains a stock of vehicles as part of its business activities (such as a car sales lot, a salvage and wrecking yard, car rental agency, etc.), shall provide for adequate parking or storage for the vehicles such that no parking occurs in a public right-of-way or in an area that has not been improved as a parking lot or storage yard. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to those required for residents, employees, customers and visitors. 
(c)	Maneuvering lanes not considered parking. Areas designated for temporary occupancy of vehicles while maneuvering on a site, such as queuing lanes for a drive-in window, are not considered parking spaces. 
TABLE 6.1. MINIMUM PARKING SPACES BY USE 

 
[Note.] 
1. Square feet. 
2. Gross floor area. The total area of all floors, measured between the exterior walls of a building. 
3. Defined as follows: 
Restaurant, Custom Service [means] an establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas. 
Restaurant, Family [means] a Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to sit-down service, occasionally with take-out service but no drive-in or drive-through facilities, and having an average turnover rate generally of less than 1 hour. Family restaurants are usually moderately priced and frequently belong to chains such as Denny's, Pizza Hut and Shoney's. 
Restaurant, Quality [means] a Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to fine dining and often associated with a particular cuisine. Quality restaurants are characterized by table settings of better silverware, china, glassware and cloth tablecloths, and have average turnover rates generally of 1 hour or more. 
4. Gross leasable area. The total area of all floors intended for occupancy and the exclusive use of tenants, specifically excluding public or common areas such as utility rooms, stairwells, enclosed malls and interior hallways. 
(d)	Handicap accessible parking spaces. 
(1)	Handicapped spaces are to be provided as required by State of Georgia accessibility requirements and the federal Americans with Disabilities Act for all multi-family and nonresidential uses. 
(2)	Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of the total number of parking spaces required under this Article. 
(3)	Handicap accessible parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle 5 feet wide, and one in every 8 handicapped spaces shall be adjacent to an aisle 8 feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 

HANDICAPPED SPACES 
(4)	Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be located on a surface with a slope not exceeding 1 vertical foot in 50 horizontal feet (1:50). 
(5)	Handicap accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking lot in the following ratio to the total number of spaces otherwise required for the use under Table 6.2. 
TABLE 6.2. HANDICAP ACCESSIBLE SPACES REQUIRED 

 
Source: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. 
(6)	Wheelchair ramps shall be provided in accordance with County specifications at locations appropriate to normal travel routes from the parking lot to the principal use. (See Jackson County Standard Details.) 
(7)	In addition to the requirements of this subsection, all handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code. 
(e)	Dedication to parking use. 
(1)	Parking spaces provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Article, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any other purpose than the temporary parking of vehicles. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, or for the sale, display or storage of equipment, goods, materials or supplies. 
(2)	Parking spaces provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Article shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements of any other use, except as provided for shared parking, below. 
(3)	Parking spaces provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Article shall not be reduced in number nor otherwise lose their functional ability to serve the land use for which they were required. 
Sec. 604. - Shared parking. 
The parking spaces provided for separate uses may be combined in one parking lot but the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
(a)	Shared parking between day and night users. One-half of the parking spaces assigned to a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(b)	Mixed use developments. Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Director of Planning & Development finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. The ratios on Table 6.3 may be used in determining the time of day and the day of the week at which the maximum number of spaces will be needed by the uses served by the shared parking facility. 
(c)	Availability of shared spaces. Parking spaces that are proposed to be shared among two or more uses must be clearly available to each use and not appear in any way to be serving a particular use, either through signage dedicating the spaces or through design techniques that would tend to orient use of the spaces to a particular business or building. 
(d)	Recordation of shared parking agreement. Shared parking arrangements must be committed to writing in an instrument acceptable to the Director of Public Development, and approved by the owners of each of the affected properties or uses. The instrument must be approved by the Director of Public Development and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court, and a copy of the recorded document must be supplied to the Director of Public Development. The document must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity, unless the agreement is dissolved with approval by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
TABLE 6.3. PERCENTAGE OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES BY TIME PERIOD 

 
By way of example, the following illustrates shared parking calculations for a particular mixed-use development: 
EXAMPLE 
Spaces Needed for Uses in a Mixed-Use Project, Calculated Individually 

 
Spaces Required Applying the Peak Demand Percentages to the Example 

 
Highest demand = 978 (instead of 1,340) 
Sec. 605. - Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. 
(a)	Location of parking spaces. All parking spaces required to meet the minimum standards of this Article shall be located in proximity to the use that the spaces serve, as follows: 
TABLE 6.4. LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES 

 
(b)	Off-site parking. If required parking spaces are not located on the same lot as the particular use, building or establishment they are intended to serve, the following shall apply: 
(1)	The parking spaces must be located on a property that has the same zoning classification as the property that the spaces serve. 
(2)	No required parking spaces may be located across any State or US highway from the use they are intended to serve. 
(3)	An easement (or other recordable instrument satisfactory to the Director of Public Development) dedicating the off-site parking to the property that the spaces serve shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court and a copy provided to the Director of Planning & Development. The document must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity, unless the agreement is dissolved with approval by the Board of Commissioners. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(4)	Off-site parking spaces shall be located in proximity to the use that the spaces serve, in accordance with the location requirements of Table 6.4, above. 
Sec. 606. - Design requirements for parking lots. 
The provisions of this Section apply to all off-street parking spaces and parking areas, whether: the parking meets or exceeds the number of spaces required to serve a particular use; or the parking lot is operated as a principal use on a property and not dedicated to serving a particular use. 
(a)	Orientation to street. Except for parcels of land devoted to one-family or two-family dwellings, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain access. 
(b)	Off-street parking spaces. 
(1)	No parking spaces shall be accessible directly from an access driveway within the first 30 feet of the driveway back from the street right-of-way line. 
(2)	Every parking space shall provide a useable rectangular area at least 9 feet wide by 20 feet long. Access aisles shall not encroach into this minimum rectangular area. Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 
(c)	Access and circulation. 
(1)	Access aisles in parking lots must be at least 24 feet wide serving spaces that are perpendicular (90 degrees) to the access aisle, and provide for two-way traffic. Access aisles serving spaces that are oblique (slanted) to the access aisle shall be limited to one-way traffic, and shall have the following minimum widths: 18 feet wide serving spaces that are at a 60-degree angle to the aisle, and 13 feet wide serving spaces that are at a 45-degree angle to the aisle. (See the Parking Illustration, below.) Angles less than 45-degree to the access aisle are not allowed, except for parking spaces that are parallel to the access aisle. 
(2)	One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle. 
(3)	Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be by means of paved driveways from the adjoining street. 
a.	The minimum width of driveways for ingress and egress shall be the same as those specified above for aisles. Driveway width, for the purpose of this section, shall include only the pavement and not the curbs and gutters. 
b.	The slope of ingress and egress driveways at their connection to the adjoining street shall not exceed that allowed by County specifications for landings at residential street intersections. 

Figure 6.1: Parking Illustration 
(4)	The distance from a parking area access drive to the intersection of two streets, and the distance between driveways at the street right-of-way between adjacent properties, shall not be less than 20 feet for a single-family or two-family dwelling and not less than 50 feet for all other uses. Distances must be measured from the back of the driveway curb at the right-of-way line (or from the edge of the driveway if curbs are not required). 
(5)	The number of driveways that access a property from any one street, road or highway shall be limited as follows: 
a.	A permit to access a State Road must be obtained from the Georgia Department of Transportation and submitted to the County Engineer before the driveway access can be approved. 
b.	Along State or U.S. numbered highways, and along all other major collector and arterial thoroughfares, no more than 1 point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. 
c.	Along all other streets or roads, no more than 2 points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public road shall be permitted for each 400 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided however, that lots with 150 feet of frontage or less shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The County Engineer shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
(6)	Inter-parcel access. 
a.	Internal Access Easements Required. Inter-parcel access shall be achieved by means of shared driveway easements between properties. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public streets which best protects the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.	Access Easement Provisions. The easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
1.	Inter-parcel vehicle access shall be required between automobile parking areas on all contiguous parcels within the nonresidential zoning districts and between all other contiguous nonresidential uses when the parking areas are or will be in reasonable proximity to one another. 
2.	On all surface drives (i.e., inter-parcel streets that are not government owned or maintained), curb cuts may be located no closer than 20 feet from a property line. 
3.	All access easements shall be no less than 28 feet in width and shall be wide enough to permit two-way vehicular traffic to and from the adjoining properties. 
4.	Inter-parcel access shall not be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way of any public street or road. 
c.	Relief. Requirements of this section may only be waived by the County Engineer when it is adequately demonstrated that the adverse impact of the required easements on use of the subject property would outweigh the reduced impact on public streets provided by reciprocal easements. 
(d)	Setback requirements. 
(1)	Unenclosed off-street parking for single-family and two-family dwellings shall have no setback requirements. 
(2)	Off-street parking for all other uses, including multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses, shall be set back from the front property line by at least 10 feet. An additional 10-foot setback from any buffer required along a side or rear property line shall also be maintained. 
(3)	The required setback area between the front property line and the parking area shall be used for landscaping and/or screening as required in the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
(e)	Lighting of parking areas. Any lights used to illuminate the parking area shall be arranged, located or screened to direct light away from any adjoining residential use. "Shoe box" recessed lighting fixtures on poles, and motion-detector security lighting, shall be utilized for this purpose. 
Sec. 607. - Improvement of parking areas. 
(a)	Surfacing and curbing. 
(1)	All off-street parking areas and all access drives for customer, visitor, and employee automobile parking to serve uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings shall be improved with a permanent dust-free surface consisting of a minimum of a 6-inch graded aggregate base overlaid with a 2-inch Type B binder and a 1½-inch Type E or F asphalt surface. 
(2)	In areas of loading docks and for parking of commercial trucks and other commercial equipment, the following surface will be required: 
a.	A 8-inch graded aggregate base, overlaid with a 3-inch Type E or F asphalt surface; or 
b.	A 10-inch graded aggregate base, overlaid with a 10-inch course of 3,000 psi concrete. 
(3)	Curb and gutter meeting County specifications for standard or roll backcurbing shall be installed around the periphery of every parking lot and loading area, and extend along both sides of every access drive between the parking lot or loading area and the street or another parking lot or loading area, as applicable. Curb and gutter may be waived by the County Engineer when appropriate to the stormwater drainage plans approved for the project. 
(b)	Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in proper repair with a dust-free surface. 
(c)	Drainage facilities. For any use that will require a parking area of 5 spaces or more, or a loading area, to be newly constructed, added to, or altered in such a way as to affect drainage either on or off the site, storm water drainage plans, including grading plans, shall be submitted to and approved by the County Engineer, prior to the issuance of a building permit or occupational license. This requirement may be waived by the County Engineer if stormwater detention or treatment is not otherwise required by this Code or State regulations. 
(d)	Permit required. Construction of a new parking lot or loading area, or expansion of an existing parking lot or loading area, requires issuance of a development permit from the Public Development Department. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(e)	Time limit. All required off-street parking areas shall be ready for use, including the above surfacing requirement, before the occupancy of the use (in the case of a new building or addition) or within 45 days after the issuance of an occupational license (in the case of a change of occupancy in an existing building). An extension of time may be granted by the County Engineer due to adverse weather conditions. 
Sec. 608. - Landscaping. 
All parking lots for 10 or more cars and areas set aside for loading of trucks or vans must provide landscaping as required by the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
Sec. 609. - Truck loading. 
(a)	Off-street truck loading; where required. Any business or industrial building, hospital, institution, or hotel, in any zoning district, shall provide adequate off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of business merchandise, supplies, goods or freight within or adjacent to the building as deemed appropriate by the owner or occupants of the property. Such loading facilities, if provided, shall not obstruct freedom of vehicular traffic or pedestrian movement on the public streets and sidewalks. 
(b)	Truck loading on public streets. The loading or unloading of business merchandise, supplies, goods or freight within a street right-of-way is prohibited in all zoning districts. Loading or unloading of furniture, equipment, or fixtures for the purpose of a home or business relocation may be allowed within a street right-of-way if: 
(1)	The street is classified as a "local" street as defined in this Code; and, 
(2)	Vehicular and pedestrian access is not completely blocked on the street; or 
(3)	The Sheriff's Department otherwise grants approval based on a determination that adequate traffic safety measures are implemented during the period of loading or unloading. 
ARTICLE 7. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 701. - Purpose and intent of Article 7. 
(a)	Purpose of sign regulation. 
(1)	Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the county without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the county, to take advantage of the beauty of the county's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the county in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. Accordingly, it is the intention of the County to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will: 
a.	Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.	Provide for the expression of commercial and noncommercial speech by citizens and businesses in the county. 
c.	Enhance the economy of the county and the success of business and industry by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs. 
d.	Restrict signs and lights that increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing or confusing the vision of drivers, bicyclists, or pedestrians. 
e.	Promote signs that are aesthetically compatible with their surroundings. 
f.	Insure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and functionality of signs. 
(2)	The purpose of this Article, therefore, is to support the economic vitality of the county through adequate identification of occupants, services, and events; to safeguard life through traffic safety; to protect the use of property, property values, and the public welfare; and to afford adequate opportunity for self-expression through free speech. These purposes are realized by regulating and controlling the number, location, size, sign type, and type of illumination of signs and sign structures so that all persons have ample opportunity to be equally heard and the public health, safety, and general welfare are adequately secured. 
(b)	Regulation of signs. No sign shall be placed or maintained on any property, building or other structure within the unincorporated area of Jackson County except in conformity with this Sign Article. Signs shall meet all requirements in Article 5 and in Article 7 as required. If there is a conflict in the requirements Article 5 will supersede the requirements listed in Article 7. 
(c)	Intent of sign regulations. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this Sign Article, any sign authorized under this Article can contain any commercial or noncommercial message, other than messages containing nudity or obscenity as defined herein, or other than a sign that advertises an activity that is illegal under Georgia or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 702. - Definitions related to sign regulations. 
The following words and phrases have specific meanings as used in this Article: 
Awning [means] a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning sign. See Building Sign. 
Banner [means] a sign other than an official or personal flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material, and usually containing a message or logo. 
Building sign [means] a sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Awning sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
(2)	Mansard sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
(3)	Marquee sign [means] any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the top of the marquee. 
(4)	Parapet sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
(5)	Projecting sign [means] a sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 8 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(6)	Roof sign [means] a sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
(7)	Under-canopy sign [means] a display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over private sidewalks. 
(8)	Wall (or façade) sign [means] a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the wall no more than 8 inches. 
(9)	Window sign [means] a sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 

Canopy [means] a permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. 
Changeable copy sign. 
(1)	Automatic changeable copy sign [means] a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
(2)	Manual changeable copy sign [means] a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
Double-faced sign [means] a sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. 
Freestanding sign [means] a sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Pole sign [means] a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
(2)	Ground sign [means] a freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. Also referred to as a "monument sign." 
Illuminated signs. 
(1)	Internally illuminated sign [means] any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
(2)	Externally illuminated sign [means] any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Incidental sign [means] a small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than one square foot. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Mansard [means] a steeply sloped, roof-like façade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Marquee [means] a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the façade of a building. 
Marquee sign. See Building Sign. 
Minimum front setback [means] the minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining street and the façade of a principal building on the property. 
Monument sign. See Ground Sign under Freestanding Sign. 
Pennant [means] any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or an "official or personal flag" as regulated in this Article. 
Planned center [means] a single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed and permitted for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
Principal freestanding sign [means] the main or largest freestanding sign or signs on a property. 
Project entrance sign [means] a permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance into a multi-family development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as but not limited to a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. 
Projecting sign. See under Building Sign. 
Roadway, controlled access [means] a state or federal highway (usually median divided) that, by design, may only be accessed from: 
(1)	Public streets where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and existing said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit; or 
(2)	Public streets where such access is provided at grade level intersections which are designed and permitted by the Georgia DOT as part of the highway construction project; or 
(3)	Right in/right out only private drives without median cuts and where such private drives are permitted by the Georgia DOT due to extenuating circumstances such as no other means of access. 
Controlled access roadways are distinguished from other state and federal roads in that the private driveway access is the exception to the rule rather than the norm. This definition does not include "limited access roadways." 
Roadway, limited access [means] a median divided state or federal highway which, by design, may only be accessed from public streets and where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and existing said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit (an example would be an interstate highway). This definition does not include "controlled access roadways." 
Roof sign. See under Building Sign. 
Sign [means] any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
Sign face [means] that portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign module [means] each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
Sign structure [means] all elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Temporary event [means] an activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include but are not limited to such activities as: 
(1)	The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent; 
(2)	An election, political campaign, referendum, or ballot proposition put to the voters as part of city, county, state, or federal governance; 
(3)	Special business promotions, such as but not limited to "grand openings," "closeout sales," carnivals and seasonal sales events; 
(4)	A yard sale; 
(5)	The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling, or renovation of a building; or 
(6)	A special event by a nonprofit organization, such as a community fair or religious assembly. 
Tenant [means] a natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Under-canopy sign. See under Building Sign. 
Vehicular sign [means] any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public right(s)-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)	Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
(2)	When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or 
(3)	When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Wall sign. See under Building Sign. 
Window Sign. See under Building Sign. 
Sec. 703. - Applicability. 
(a)	Signs that are regulated. The regulations and requirements of this Article apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of public property, except as otherwise exempt under this Section. 
(b)	Exemptions; general. The following are exempt from all restrictions and regulations imposed by this Article: 
(1)	Window displays of goods available on a site are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
(2)	Brand names or logos on products, product containers, or product dispensers (such as but not limited to a soft drink machine or gasoline pump) that are an integral part of the product or the product's packaging are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
(3)	A building design, color, or motif that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but which conveys no message is not considered to be a sign and is exempt from these sign regulations. 
(c)	Signs that are exempt from regulation. Each of the following types of signs are allowed on any property and are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this Article: 
(1)	Official signs. Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority, such as but not limited to traffic signs, signals, or regulatory devices or warnings; official emblems, public notices, or official instruments; signs providing directions to specific facilities or locations; signs of historical interest; signs designating special events or areas of architectural or historic significance or gateways; or other similar governmental signs or devices. Such signs are authorized within all rights-of-way or other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, or authority; and at such other locations as a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority may direct. 
(2)	Property address signs. Property addresses are not signs when displayed on a building or mailbox, provided that such property address consist of lettering no larger than 5 inches in height on a building or 3 inches on a mailbox. 
(3)	Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations and displays erected on a seasonal basis that are not intended to be permanent in nature. 
(4)	Incidental signs. Small signs and postings as defined in this Article of no more than 1 square foot, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 16 square feet. 
Sec. 704. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(a)	Animated and flashing signs. Signs other than automatic changeable copy signs that flash, blink, rotate, revolve, or have moving parts or visible bulbs, are not allowed. Signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours are not allowed. 
(b)	Attached and painted signs. Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, utility poles, or rocks or other natural features, are not allowed. 
(c)	Banners. Banners are not allowed except as provided for temporary signage under this Article. When allowed as temporary signage, a banner shall be allowed only as wall or window signage and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Banners shall not be hung as under-canopy signs, flown as flags, or used as any other form of sign. 
(d)	Dilapidated signs. Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code of the County are not allowed. 
(e)	Display of nudity. Signs displaying nudity, as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75(b)(1), are not allowed. 
(f)	Festoons. Strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind, are not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this Article. 
(g)	Inflatable signs. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support is not allowed. 
(h)	Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80(b), are not allowed. 
(i)	Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(j)	Portable signs. A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not attached to the ground, such as but not limited to the following, is not allowed (except as provided for temporary signage under this Article): 
(1)	A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it; 
(2)	A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels; 
(3)	An A-frame or sandwich board sign; or 
(4)	A vehicular sign. 
(k)	Private signs placed on public property. Any sign posted or erected on utility poles, governmental signs, public rights-of-way or any other public property is not allowed, except those placed by agencies of the federal, state, or local government. 
(l)	Roof signs. Roof signs, including signs painted or adhered on roofs, are not allowed. This prohibition does not apply to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall. 
(m)	Signs imitating public warning or traffic devices. Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words "stop," "danger," or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver, is not allowed. No red, green, or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
(n)	Sound or smoke emitting signs. A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors, is not allowed. 
(o)	Signs advertising illegal activity. Signs that advertise an activity illegal under Georgia or federal law are not allowed. 
Sec. 705. - General requirements applying to all signs. 
(a)	Conformance to Building Codes. 
(1)	In addition to any sign permit required under this Article, a building permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector prior to installation or placement of any freestanding sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than 6 square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all Building Code and Electrical Code requirements. 
(2)	Plans required for issuance of a building permit for a sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the Building Code by a qualified structural engineer, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the Building Code. 
(3)	All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. 
(4)	All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the Electrical Code. 
(5)	Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Electrical Code. 
(b)	Conformance to state law. The following applies to any sign located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an Interstate, U.S. or State-numbered highway (or any other road designated as a "primary highway" by the State of Georgia and approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such highway but visible and intended to be read from such highway: 
(1)	Such sign shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
(2)	Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this Article. Between the Georgia and Jackson County regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
(c)	Sign maintenance. 
(1)	All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
(2)	All signs shall be maintained in accordance with all County regulations, including any regulations concerning nuisances and vegetation. 
(d)	Minimum sign setback. No sign or sign structure of any kind is authorized to extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in any portion of a public right-of-way (except official signs). Unless provided otherwise in this Article, all signs on a property are subject to the setback requirements for accessory uses under the property's zoning classification, but in no case may any portion of a sign be located less than 5 feet from a public right-of-way except for miscellaneous signs allowed under 708(a)(1) of this Article. 
(e)	Principal freestanding signs; distance between. 
(1)	Signs 100 square feet in area or less. Each principal freestanding sign having an area of 100 square feet or less shall be located at least 50 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. The Building Inspector may reduce this distance if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
(2)	Signs greater than 100 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area greater than 100 square feet shall be located at least 500 feet from any other freestanding sign having an area greater than 100 square feet, and at least 200 feet from a property where signs having an area of at least 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(3)	Principal freestanding signs shall be located at least 25 feet from a side lot line, or one-half the width of the lot frontage, whichever is less. In no case may the sign be located more closely to a side lot line than the minimum required by the zoning district. 
(f)	Ground clearance under signs. 
(1)	Projecting signs shall not project more than 3 feet beyond the face of the building. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum of 8 feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
(2)	Under-canopy signs of greater than 4 square feet shall be rigidly mounted, and there shall be 8 feet of clearance below the base of any rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. There shall be a minimum clearance of 7 feet below the base of any nonrigidly mounted under-canopy sign. 
(3)	Awning, mansard and marquee signs shall be no less than 8 feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
(g)	Visibility clearance area. 
(1)	No portion of a sign face, and no portion of a sign structure wider than 12 inches, between the heights of 2½ feet and 12 feet shall be located within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads, or within 20 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way and either edge of a driveway. 
(2)	No sign shall be erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. 
(h)	Illuminated signs. 
(1)	Where restricted. Signs are allowed to be externally or internally illuminated, except as follows: 
a.	A sign located on an agricultural property may not be internally illuminated. External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public rights-of-way or neighboring properties. 
b.	A sign located on single- or two-family residential property may not be illuminated. 
(2)	Traffic Control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(3)	Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(4)	Light Pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 100 feet of any residential zoning district or property occupied by a dwelling. 
(5)	Neon Tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. 
(6)	Exposed Wires. No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
(7)	Strings of Bulbs. Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday celebration. 
(8)	Hours of illumination. No sign shall be illuminated between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. except for those hours during which the premises on which the sign is located is open for business. 
(9)	Types of illumination. 
a.	Externally-illuminated sign. An externally-illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
b.	Internally-illuminated sign. Internally-illuminated signs, where permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. Internally channeled or reverse-channeled letters are permitted only in instances of wall signs affixed to buildings with a front setback of more than 100 feet. 
Sec. 706. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
(a)	Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this Article, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. The terms "sign area" and "sign face area" are interchangeable and have the same meaning for the purpose of regulating maximum sign sizes. 
(1)	Sign face area. 
a.	The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

Examples of Sign Face Area Measurements 
b.	For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face. 
c.	The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign module. 

d.	Manual changeable copy signs and Automatic changeable copy signs. For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(2)	Sign Structure Area. 
a.	The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 

Examples of Sign Structure Area Measurements 
b.	Project entrance signs. For project entrance signs or other signs that are imposed, mounted or painted on a wall or other decorative structure, the sign structure area shall be computed as that portion of such wall or other decorative structure that is discernibly devoted to the support of the sign or, by its design or architectural treatment, intended to provide a background or frame for the sign. 
(3)	Treatment of open spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign module, or sign structure. 
(4)	Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
(b)	Measurement of sign height. The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street within 50 feet of any portion of the sign, to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 707. - Permanent signs allowed, by land use category. 
The following Tables 7.1 and 7.2 present the maximum number, size, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signage that are permitted by right in each land use category. Additional signage is permitted under this Article and under Sec. 708 and Sec. 709 of this Article. 
(a)	Principal Freestanding Sign—One Use on Property. "Principal Freestanding Sign—One Use on Property" on Table 7.1 applies to a lot where there is only one use being made of the property, such as but not limited to one single-family or two-family dwelling, one multi-family development, one public or community institution, or one business occupant. A predominantly agricultural property, with or without a residence on the property, is considered a single agricultural use. Properties that are vacant but zoned or offered for sale or lease for a particular land use also fall under this category. 
(b)	Principal Freestanding Sign—Planned Center. "Principal Freestanding Sign—Planned Center" on Table 7.1 applies to a single commercial or industrial property that is designed and permitted for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately-owned and have no corporate relationship. A planned center may consist of several businesses in a single building or individual businesses in several buildings on the property. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(c)	Project entrance signs. Project entrance signs are signs located at an entrance into a residential subdivision, into a multi-family development, or into an office, commercial or industrial park consisting of two or more lots. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed the number, area or height limitations shown on Table 7.1. 
(d)	Building signs. For building signs permitted on Table 7.2, the following shall apply: 
(1)	For single-occupant buildings, the maximum allowed area for a building sign on a wall shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the entire area of said wall, including all windows and doors. 
(2)	For multi-tenant buildings, the maximum allowed area for each building sign for each tenant shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the area of the wall, including all windows and doors, of that portion of the structure occupied by the tenant. 
(3)	In no case shall a window sign obscure more than 20% of a window. 
(4)	Projecting and under-canopy signs shall be limited to no more than 1 per tenant on a property, and each tenant shall have no more than 1 projecting sign or under-canopy sign, for each street that the tenant faces. 
(e)	Automatic changeable copy signs. Automatic changeable copy signs are only allowed on commercial and industrial properties. Automatic changeable copy signs are only permitted as principle freestanding signs (one use on property or planned center) or project entrance signs. The automatic changeable copy shall not consist of more than 25% of the total square footage of the permitted sign face. 
(f)	Master planned development. For signs in a master planned development (MPD), each property or individual development within the MPD shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the MPD. If no such regulations exist, each property or individual development within a master planned development shall conform to the provisions of this Article in accordance with the land use category of said property or individual development. 
TABLE 7.1. PERMITTED FREESTANDING SIGNS—BY LAND USE CATEGORY 

 
1   Whichever is greater. 
2   A public or community use property adjacent to a limited access or controlled access highway may have a sign next to and viewable from said highway of up to 128 square feet in area and 16 feet high. 
3   This is to allow a single sign per road frontage; therefore, if a parcel is either a corner lot or fronts on 2 or more roads (right-of-ways) a single sign may be placed on each frontage not multiple signs on a single frontage. See definitions of "frontage" and "yard: front yard" in the Glossary or Terms in this UDC. 
*  No more than 25% of the total sign face square footage may consist of automatic changeable copy. 
TABLE 7.2. PERMITTED BUILDING SIGNAGE—BY LAND USE CATEGORY 

 
3   Additional wall signage is allowed for each tenant as follows: for a tenant occupying 50,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, 1 additional building sign is allowed (total); for a tenant occupying more than 100,000 square feet of floor area, 2 additional building signs are allowed (total). 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 708. - Other permanent signs allowed. 
(a)	Miscellaneous freestanding signs. Freestanding signs in addition to those shown on Table 7.1 are allowed as accessory uses on a property occupied by any multi-family, commercial, industrial, or public or community use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
(1)	Within the area between a street and the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, additional signs may be located within 3 feet of driveways that provide access into or from the property. There shall be no more than 2 such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in sign area nor be more than 2½ feet in height. 
(2)	Miscellaneous signs located farther from the street than the minimum required front yard setback shall be allowed as follows: 
a.	One miscellaneous sign not to exceed 64 square feet in area nor more than 8 feet in height may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot. 
b.	Other miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed beyond the minimum front yard setback on a property developed for multi-family, commercial, industrial, or public or community use, provided that such signs shall have no more than 4 square feet in sign face area nor more than 3 feet in height (except signs that are required by law to be higher than 3 feet high, such as those marking a handicapped parking space). 
(b)	Interstate signs. Freestanding signs in addition to those shown on Table 7.1 are allowed along the Interstate Highway under the following provisions: 
(1)	Location of interstate signs. 
a.	Each interstate sign shall be located within 660 feet of the Interstate Highway and within an area 1,500 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
b.	Interstate signs must be within an area zoned under the commercial or industrial districts as specified in state law (see Table 2.1). 
(2)	Number of signs per interchange. Three interstate signs are allowed per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. 
(3)	Uniform size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be 14 feet in height and 48 feet in length, with or without trim. 
(4)	Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
(5)	Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of 10 feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. "Monopole" signs shall not exceed 70 feet in height; all other types shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(6)	Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face to the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(7)	Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or "v" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side by side) facing the same direction. 
(8)	Spacing and setbacks. 
a.	Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
b.	Sign structures shall be no less than 10 feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
(9)	Historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of an area of designated historic interest. 
(c)	Private and public recreational signs. 
(1)	Private and public recreational activities support signs shall be those signs erected on walls, fences, dugouts, press boxes, stadium stands, concession stands, ticket booths, benches and locker rooms which are sold by private and/or public organizations to support recreational activities of the type sponsored by nonprofit organizations or the school district. 
(2)	Such signs shall be allowed on any public or community use property where the aforementioned recreational facility is permitted and located. 
(3)	Such individual signs shall not exceed 8 feet in height and 32 square feet in area and must face inward to the recreational activity area. 
(4)	There shall be no limit on the number of signs per site provided that such sign faces are not visible from neighboring residential property or public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 709. - Temporary signs. 
The following temporary signs are allowed under the provisions of this Article: 
(a)	Official or personal flag. Any cloth, paper, thin plastic, or similar material that is displayed by hanging or flying, representing in whole the officially adopted symbol or emblem of a government, political subdivision, institution, organization, or corporation; or, a flag adopted or flown by a person as a symbol or statement, is allowed as an accessory use on any property that is used in any land use category if it complies with all of the following: 
(1)	Number of flags. 
a.	No more than 5 official or personal flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by an agricultural use, a single-family or two-family residential use, or a multi-family residential use. 
b.	No more than 5 official and personal flags may be displayed on a lot occupied by a commercial use, an industrial use, or a public or community use. 
c.	Official and personal flags shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, nor be located on flagpoles that exceed the building height limitation of the zoning district for the property where the flag is displayed. 
d.	The official flag of the United States of America shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes. 
(b)	Election-cycle signs. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
c.	No such sign can be placed within 50 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a driveway. 
(2)	Setback. No setback from the street right-of-way line shall be required for an election cycle sign, except that any such sign shall not be placed within or over the street right-of-way nor affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure. 
(3)	Size. Election-cycle signs shall not exceed five feet in height and 9 square feet in area. 
(4)	Number and duration. 
a.	A maximum number of signs equal to one sign for each elective office and for each other ballot question related to the election may be placed on a property. 
b.	Election-cycle signs may be displayed from the last day of qualification of candidates until the election of all candidates to office or resolution of all ballot questions put to the voters in the election. 
(5)	Permanence. 
a.	Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as but not limited to poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b.	The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic or manual changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(c)	Real estate signs. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
c.	No such sign can be placed within 50 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a driveway. 
(2)	Setback. No setback from the street right-of-way line shall be required, except that any such sign shall not be placed within or over the street right-of-way nor affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure. 
(3)	Size. 
a.	Agricultural property. Temporary event signs located on a property offered for sale or lease as an agricultural property shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and 10 feet in height. 
b.	Single- and two-family residential property. Temporary event signs located on a property offered for sale or lease as a single-family or two-family residence shall not exceed 9 square feet in area and 6 feet in height. 
c.	Multi-family, commercial or institutional, and industrial use properties. Temporary event signs located on a property offered for sale or lease as a multi-family or nonresidential use shall not exceed 48 square feet in area and 10 feet in height. 
(4)	Number and duration. 
a.	One freestanding sign per street frontage may be placed on a property that is available for sale or lease. For a planned center, one additional building sign may be placed on each tenant space that is available for sale or lease. During construction of a residential or nonresidential subdivision, one additional sign may be placed at each entrance into the subdivision. 
b.	The temporary sign may be placed upon the availability of the building or premises for sale or lease, and shall be removed within 10 days of the closing of the sale or execution of the rental agreement. 
(5)	Permanence. Only permanent construction materials shall be used. The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated except on commercial or industrial properties. 
(d)	Short duration temporary signs. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
c.	No such sign can be placed within 50 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a driveway. 
(2)	Setback. No setback from the street right-of-way line shall be required for a short duration temporary sign, except that any such sign shall not be placed within or over the street right-of-way nor affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure. 
(3)	Size. Short duration temporary signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height and 9 square feet in area. 
(4)	Number and duration. 
a.	No more than two short duration temporary signs can be erected on any lot at any one time. 
b.	Short duration temporary signs can be erected for a maximum of 4 weeks. 
c.	Short duration temporary signs cannot be placed on the same lot more than three times per calendar year from January 1st to December 31st. 
(5)	Permanence. 
a.	Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as but not limited to poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b.	The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic or manual changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(e)	Long duration temporary signs. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
c.	No such sign can be placed within 50 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a driveway. 
(2)	Setback. No part of any long duration temporary sign shall be located in, on or within 5 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(3)	Size. Except for portable signs, banners, streamers and flags allowed under 709(f), long duration temporary signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height and 9 square feet in area. 
(4)	Number and duration. 
a.	No more than two long duration temporary signs can be erected on any lot at any one time. 
b.	Long duration temporary signs can be erected for a maximum of 60 days. 
c.	Long duration temporary signs cannot be placed on the same lot more than two times per calendar year from January 1st to December 31st. 
(5)	Permanence. Except for portable signs, banners, streamers and flags allowed under 709(f), only permanent construction materials shall be used. The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated except on commercial or industrial properties. 
(f)	Portable signs, banners, streamers and flags. Portable signs, banners, streamers and flags are allowed as long duration temporary signs on a property developed for commercial or industrial uses, subject to all provisions that pertain to long duration temporary signs and the following additional restrictions: 
(1)	[Purpose.] The primary purpose of this Subsection is to allow additional temporary signage during special commercial events, such as "grand openings" and special sales. 
(2)	Portable signs. One portable sign per developed lot or business is allowed under the following conditions and requirements: 
a.	Prior to the erection or placement of these signs or devices, all required fees and taxes shall be paid by the owner of the sign. 
b.	The maximum size allowance for these devices and signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. The square footage of said portable sign, when combined with other signs on the same lot, shall not exceed the total square footage authorized for freestanding signs in the land use category. Said sign shall not have arrows, directional arrows, or flashing lights. 
c.	No portable sign shall be placed on a lot that is used for residential purposes. 
d.	The sign must be placed on the site in such a manner as to be at least 5 feet from the right-of-way and to not be an obstruction for traffic or visibility. The location of the sign is subject to approval of the Building Inspector. 
e.	To prevent wind damage to the sign or other property, the sign must be securely anchored to the site in a manner acceptable to the Building Inspector. 
f.	All electrical connections to the sign must be in compliance with the electrical codes as adopted by the County, and must be inspected prior to use. 
g.	The maximum number of portable sign permits to be issued to a single location or site at any given time shall be 1 sign. 
(3)	Banners, streamers and flags. 
a.	Banners, streamers and flags shall be counted towards the total square foot sign area for freestanding signs permitted for the lot on which they are placed, and when added to the area of all other signs on said lot shall not exceed the total sign area permitted for the lot. 
b.	No part of any such sign shall be located in, on or within 5 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(g)	Weekend signs. Weekend signs are allowed as temporary signs under the following provisions. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(2)	Setback. No setback from the street right-of-way line shall be required for a weekend sign, except that any such sign shall not be placed within or over the street right-of-way nor affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure. 
(3)	Size. Such signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in area nor be more than 3 feet in height. 
(4)	Duration. Weekend signs shall be allowed only between Friday starting at 5:00 p.m. and Sunday ending at 8:00 p.m. 
(5)	Permanence. 
a.	Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as but not limited to poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
b.	The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic or manual changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(h)	Construction signs. Additional signs are allowed as temporary signs during the construction or remodeling of a project or building. 
(1)	Location. 
a.	Such signs are allowed on properties in all land use categories. 
b.	Such signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(2)	Setback. No part of any long duration temporary sign shall be located in, on or within 5 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(3)	Number and size of signs. The number of such signs and their sizes shall be limited to one of the following: 
a.	One temporary sign per contractor not exceeding 9 square feet in area nor more than 6 feet in height; or 
b.	One sign per property, not exceeding 100 square feet in area nor more than 20 feet in height in a residential zoning district; or 
c.	One sign per property, not exceeding 200 square feet in area nor more than 20 feet in height in a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(4)	Duration. The sign(s) may be placed upon issuance of a development permit authorizing site grading, or a building permit authorizing the construction, interior finish or remodeling, and must be removed upon issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, final building inspection, or approval for connection to electric power for the work authorized by the building permit, whichever occurs first. 
(5)	Permanence. 
a.	Only permanent construction materials shall be used. The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face; automatic changeable copy shall not be allowed. 
(6)	Lighting. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
Sec. 710. - Sign permits. 
(a)	Sign permits; when required. In addition to a building permit as may be required under the Building Code, a sign permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector prior to installation, relocation, expansion, construction or structural alteration of any sign regulated under this Article except for those signs specifically exempted under 710(b), below. 
(b)	Sign permits; exemptions. The following do not require issuance of a sign permit. [3] 
(1)	A sign permit will not be required under the following conditions: 
a.	Replacing or altering the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that compose a sign's message, in whole or in part, shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
b.	Painting, repairing, cleaning, or maintaining a sign shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
(2)	A sign permit will not be required for the following listed signs: 
a.	Any sign that is otherwise exempt from regulation under Section 703 of this Article. 
b.	A principal freestanding sign on a single-family or two-family residential property allowed under 707(a) of this Article does not require a sign permit. 
c.	Miscellaneous freestanding signs that are allowed under 708(a) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
d.	Public and private recreational signs that are allowed under 708(c) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
e.	Official or personal flags that are allowed under 709(a) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
f.	Election-cycle signs that are allowed under 709(b) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
g.	Real estate signs that are allowed under 709(c) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
h.	Weekend signs that are allowed under 709(g) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
i.	Construction signs that are allowed under 709(h) of this Article do not require a sign permit. 
j.	Any building sign less than 6 square feet in area does not require a sign permit. 
(c)	Multi-Tenant Nonresidential Projects. 
(1)	A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development, such as a shopping center, before any signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. 
(2)	The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the development as to their location, number, materials, size, letter style, and color. 
(3)	A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
a.	The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
b.	The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the Planning & Development Department. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the Planning & Development Director that: 
1.	The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
2.	The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan shall comply with the requirements of the Sign Regulations Article in all respects. 
(4)	The requirements of the approved uniform sign plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the Clerk to Superior Court prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or connection to permanent power for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease, or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. 
(5)	All tenants of the development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
(d)	Issuance of a sign permit. 
(1)	Sign review required. For any sign requiring issuance of a sign permit under the provisions of this Article, sign review shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction or reconstruction of the sign. The sign application, with the nonrefundable application fee established by the Board of Commissioners, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector. 
(2)	Sign permit application. 
a.	Application for signs other than temporary signs. The application for a sign permit for all types of signs other than temporary signs must include the following: 
1.	An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all existing signs and sign structures currently on the property. 
2.	An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all proposed signs to be located on the property and all existing signs proposed to be removed. 
3.	A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems for each proposed sign. 
4.	The estimated cost of construction for each proposed sign. 
5.	An agreement wherein the applicant shall indemnify the county against all damages, demands, or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure. 
6.	Any other information as may be reasonably required by the Building Inspector to determine compliance with all provisions of this Article. 
b.	Application for temporary signs. The application for a sign permit for a temporary sign must include the following: 
1.	A list of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
2.	A description of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
3.	For portable signs, banners, streamers and flags, written and graphic evidence of compliance with all requirements of 709(f). 
(3)	Approval of sign permit. 
a.	Once a complete application for a sign permit has been received, within 30 days the Building Inspector shall review the application and either: 
1.	Issue the permit; or 
2.	Inform the applicant of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
b.	Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this Article, the Building Code, and all other applicable laws, regulations, and Articles, the sign permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector. 
c.	If the Building Inspector fails to act on a complete application within 30 days of receipt, it shall be deemed approved, subject to the requirements and provisions of this Article. 
d.	An applicant may appeal the denial of a sign permit as an appeal of an administrative decision to the Board of Appeals following the procedures for such appeals under the Appeals Article of this Code. Such appeals must be filed with the Director of Planning & Development within 5 days of the denial of the sign permit. 
(4)	Permit identification to be placed on the sign. Every sign for which a permit is issued shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee and shall have the number of the sign permit affixed on the framework in the lower right hand area of the sign or on the sign face using a durable material so that it is easily seen and weatherproof. 
(5)	Expiration of sign permit for uncompleted construction. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been substantially completed (to the extent of at least 60% completion based on the estimated cost of construction from the permit application) within six months of issuance. One 6-month extension may be approved by the Building Inspector for circumstances deemed extenuating and reasonable. 
(6)	Fee schedule. The Board of Commissioners may from time to time, establish a schedule of fees for sign permits or modify said fee schedule as necessary to include, but not necessarily be limited to, the cost of issuing permits, making inspections and other administrative matters related to this Article. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
These exemptions apply only to the requirement of a permit and do not relieve the owner of the sign from compliance with all other requirements of this Article for the particular sign. 

Sec. 711. - Modifications to sign restrictions. 
(a)	Requests for modifications. 
(1)	Modifications to the restrictions on signage for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval. 
(2)	Such requests shall be submitted to the Public Development Department for review and handling. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Uniform sign plan required. A request for modification shall be supported by a uniform sign plan. 
(1)	The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)	The uniform sign plan shall establish design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(c)	Denial of modification request. If the Public Development Director denies the requested modification, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Approval of modification request. 
(1)	Following approval by the Public Development Director or the Board of Adjustment, the requirements of the approved uniform sign plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the Clerk to Superior Court prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease, or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
ARTICLE 8. - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS AND TREE CONSERVATION 

Sec. 801. - Purpose of Article 8. 
The purpose of this Article is to improve the aesthetic qualities of the county and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of its neighborhoods and business areas by: 
(1)	Providing for quality and consistency in the design of landscaping and screening. 
(2)	Providing for the separation of incompatible types of land use. 
(3)	Providing for the conservation of existing trees and the planting of new trees in pace with the land development process. 
Sec. 802. - Landscaping, buffers and tree conservation definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
Agricultural Activities [means]: 
(1)	Good-faith commercial production from the land or on the land of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products, but not including forestry products (see "Tree harvesting" below); and 
(2)	Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
Aquifer [means] an underground reservoir of groundwater from which water can be drawn by a well or natural spring. 
Berm [means] a mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
Buffer [means] an area of natural vegetation or man-made construction, which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
(1)	Natural Buffer [means] a visual screen created by vegetation of such density so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
(2)	Structural Buffer [means] a visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
Caliper [means] the diameter of a proposed tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point 6 inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including 4-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Critical Root Zone [means] the minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The Critical Root Zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one (1) times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. EXAMPLE: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 20 feet. 
Dead Plant or Tree [means] any living plant material that has lost 33% or more of its branches or leaves, as determined by the County, shall be considered dead. 
Development Site [means] that portion of a tract of land that will be dedicated to a proposed development, including the land containing trees that will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. 
Diameter Breast Height (DBH) [means] the diameter of an existing tree trunk measured at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Drip Line [means] a perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Flowering Trees [means] ornamental trees that are known for their blooms and generally mature at a height of less than 40 feet. Flowering trees approved for use include dogwood, redbud, crape myrtle, and ornamental cherry. Flowering trees not approved for use include Bradford Pear. 
Greenway [means] an area along the course of any river, stream, creek, branch, lake, reservoir, pond, drainage system, spring, well or other body of surface or subsurface water, whether natural or artificial to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. Greenways are established pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
Ground Cover [means] a low growing plant, other than turf grass, which forms a continuous cover over the ground surface. 
Groundwater Recharge Area [means] the land area where the water that eventually seeps down into an aquifer first enters the ground. 
Hardwood Tree [means] any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Heavily Landscaped Area [means] an area planted with a combination of shade and flowering trees, deciduous and evergreen shrubs, and flowering perennials such that the entire area is covered with landscape materials. The green space designated to be heavily landscaped shall have no more than 25% of its area covered in turf (seed or sod). The remaining 75% shall contain shade trees (2 inch caliper minimum), flowering trees (1 inch caliper minimum), evergreen shrubs (3 gallon minimum), deciduous shrubs (3 gallon minimum), and perennials or nonturf groundcovers (2½ inch pot minimum). All plant materials shall be mulched. 
Impermeable [means] something that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by, such as a layer of rock. 
Impervious Surface [means] a surface that rainwater cannot penetrate or be absorbed by, such as a paved or gravel parking lot, paved road or building. 
Landscape Materials [means] any combination of living plant materials and nonliving materials such as rock, pebbles, sand, mulch, pavers, berms, fencing, walls, fountains and other decorative materials. 
Landscaping [means] landscaping shall consist of shrubs, vines, turf, ground cover and other landscape materials which are utilized to enhance the aesthetic and functional qualities of a site. 
Opaque [means] impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Overstory Tree [means] any deciduous or evergreen tree that has the potential to grow to a mature height of 40 feet or more (Reference Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia, Cooperative Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625 or any similar publication.) Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
Parking Bay [means] three or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
Plant Materials [means] living plants, such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, grasses and perennial flowering plants, turf, and vines that are suitable for ornamental and/or functional use. 
Protected Zone [means] all lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of the parcel required to remain in open space, and all designated buffers or tree save areas, and other areas as may be established by conditions of zoning approval. 
Replacement Tree [means] a new Tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements (regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development). 
Screen [means] natural vegetation or a decorative structure that creates an opaque visual block or obscures an unattractive view. Screening may consist of any combination of the following, as approved by the Director: 
(1)	Fencing constructed of cedar, redwood, treated wood, or other suitable all-weather material. 
(2)	Masonry walls. 
(3)	Plant materials or natural vegetation. 
(4)	Earthen berms. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, a screen is opaque to a height of 6 feet above the ground surface or, for a screen of plant materials, has the maximum opacity obtainable with the approved arrangement and species of plant materials, to a height of 6 feet. 
Shade Tree [means] a broadleaf deciduous tree having an average height at maturity of a least 40 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Shrub [means] a self-supporting woody plant that normally reaches a height of less than 15 feet. 
Softwood Tree [means] any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Specimen Tree [means] any Tree that meets all of the following criteria due to its size and condition: 
(1)	Size Criteria. 
a.	Overstory hardwoods: 20-inch diameter or larger. 
b.	Overstory softwoods: 30-inch diameter or larger. 
c.	Understory trees (see Definitions): 8-inch diameter or larger. 
(2)	Condition Criteria. 
a.	Life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
b.	Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
c.	No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
d.	No major insect or pathological problem. 
Tree [means] any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least 2 inches and a height of at least 10 feet and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree Harvesting [means] the planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular agricultural practice on a tract of land; not including the removal of trees for purposes of development or the removal of trees without replanting. 
Tree Save Area [means] all areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree Unit Value [means] a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. Tree unit values relate to the size of the tree trunk (diameter or caliper). One tree unit is not equivalent to one tree. 
Turf [means] ground cover composed of one or more species of perennial grass that is grown as a permanent lawn. 
Understory Tree [means] any deciduous or evergreen tree that has the potential to grow to a mature height of less than 40 feet ( Reference Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia, Cooperative Extension Service, and The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625 or any similar publication.) Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
Sec. 803. - Calculation of "tree units." 
(a)	Use of tree units. The landscaping requirements of this Article with regard to the preservation or planting of trees is expressed in terms of "tree units" rather than the number of trees. This approach provides the developer with wide latitude of choice as to the number and sizes of trees to be planted, and their distribution following aesthetic landscaping practices, while achieving a common standard on all properties. 
(b)	Establishment of tree unit values. The diameter of a tree's trunk establishes the "tree unit" value of an existing tree, as shown on Table 8.1. 
(1)	The values assigned to trees of the same size are different for existing and new trees, as indicated in the table. One "unit" is not the same as one "tree." 
(2)	Actual tree diameters or calipers are to be rounded to the nearest whole number for the calculation of tree unit values (e.g., 4.5 = 5). 
(3)	Existing trees may be counted by DBH category groupings as shown on Table 8.1, and multiplied by the average tree unit value for each grouping. The tree unit value for a tree greater than 20 inches DBH shall be determined by dividing the square of the tree's diameter at breast height by 100 (Diameter 2 ÷ 100). 
TABLE 8.1. TREE UNIT VALUES 
TREE UNIT VALUES FOR EXISTING TREES* 

 
The unit value for an individual tree over 20 inches DBH shall be calculated as follows: 

 
*See text for increased tree unit values for Specimen Trees for which extraordinary measures for protection and survival have been taken. 
TREE UNIT VALUES FOR NEW (REPLACEMENT) TREES 

 
Tree unit values for container grown pine are: 

 
The use of 3-gallon pines requires specific approval in writing by the County. 
(c)	Tree unit values for specimen trees. The tree unit values shown on Table 8.1 may be increased by 100% for an existing tree that meets the definition of a "specimen tree," provided that extraordinary measures are taken to protect the tree and assure its survival. Such measures may include but are not limited to the provision of tree wells, retaining walls, aeration, or supplementary irrigation, as applicable to the site of the tree and as approved by the County. 
DIVISION I. - LANDSCAPING OF PROJECTS IN GENERAL 

Sec. 804. - Landscaping; where required. 
(a)	Residential subdivisions exempt. General landscaping requirements under this Division for landscaping of yard areas and for landscape strips along front and side lot lines are not imposed on any residential subdivision for single-family or two-family development, or on the lot when a single-family or two-family dwelling is to be constructed (except for grassing). The tree conservation requirements under Division V of this Article, however, including the provision of street trees, apply to all developments, including residential subdivisions, and in specified circumstances to individual residential lots. 
(b)	Multi-family and nonresidential uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the property of any multi-family or nonresidential use or development as a condition of site plan approval, or issuance of a development permit or building permit, whichever occurs first. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Article, which includes the following: 
(1)	Within the yard areas of the property, and in landscape strips along the street frontages and side lot lines. 
(2)	Within parking lots containing 5 or more parking spaces and between such lots and streets from which they are visible. 
(3)	As buffers between incompatible land uses and zoning districts. 
(4)	As replacement trees for those removed during construction, or as a supplement, in order to achieve the tree conservation requirements of this Article. 
(c)	Overlay Districts. Landscaping shall meet all requirements in Article 5 and in Article 8 as required. If there is a conflict in the requirements Article 5 will supersede the requirements in Article 8. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 805. - Landscaping of yard areas. 
Single-family and two-family subdivisions and lots are exempt from the requirements of this Section, provided that the front yard areas within each lot within such subdivision are fully grassed (or otherwise landscaped) with sod or turf. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(a)	Open yard areas; multi-family and nonresidential sites. All portions of a multi-family or nonresidential site not covered with paving or buildings shall be landscaped. Such landscaped areas not covered with other materials such as mulch, wood chips or other landscaping materials to protect and preserve planting areas, shall be covered with turf or ground cover. Turf or ground cover utilized on all slopes in excess of 25% (1 foot of rise in 4 feet of run) must be specifically selected to stabilize the slope. 
(b)	Trash storage containers. All exterior commercial trash storage containers shall be screened so that they are not visible from off the property, and a permanent masonry or frame enclosure shall be provided for each such bin. A detailed drawing of enclosure and screening methods to be used in connection with trash bins on the property shall be included with the site-landscaping plan. 
Sec. 806. - Landscape strips along front lot lines. 
Single-family and two-family subdivisions and lots are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
(a)	Landscape strips along front lot lines; where required. A minimum 10-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along the full length of any street frontage of a multi-family or nonresidential development. The landscape strip shall be at least 50 feet wide, for any property designated with the Character area of Urban and a Future Land Use designation of Commercial as shown in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)	Location of structures in frontage landscape strip. Frontage landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, storm-water detention facilities or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
(1)	Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(2)	Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and pedestrian lighting. 
(3)	Underground utilities and fire hydrants. 
(4)	Driveways required to access the property. 
(5)	Signs otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(c)	Landscaping required in frontage landscape strips. 
(1)	All portions of a frontage landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. Trees may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(2)	Trees shall be provided within the frontage landscape strip at the rate of one tree unit for every 60 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof (excluding driveways). Such trees may be hardwoods or softwoods, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions. These trees shall be credited toward the tree conservation requirements of this Article. 
(3)	Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than 2 inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(4)	Trees and shrubs in the frontage landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way, nor interfere with the sight triangle requirements of this Development Code for street and driveway intersections. 
(5)	Shrubs are to be provided within the frontage landscape strip at the rate of 10 shrubs for every 60 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof (excluding driveways). Shrubs must be at least 18 inches tall at the time of planting, and be certified by a registered Landscape Architect to be of a species that will normally exceed 2 feet in height at maturity. 
(Ord. No. 11-001, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 807. - Landscape strips along side lot lines. 
Single-family and two-family residential subdivisions and individual lots, and multi-family developments, are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
(a)	Landscape strips along side lot lines; where required. 
(1)	A landscape strip shall be provided along any side lot line of a nonresidential development (unless a buffer is otherwise required along the side lot line). 
(2)	The landscape strip is to extend from the frontage landscape strip to the rear lot line of the property. 
(3)	The side yard landscape strip must be at least 5 feet wide if trees are to be planted within it. When provided in combination with a landscape strip on adjacent property, each property must meet the landscaping requirements of this Section independently, but the planting of trees must be coordinated to provide adequate separation and planting area for each tree. 
(b)	Location of structures in side landscape strip. Side yard landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other uses except for the following: 
(1)	Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(2)	Underground utilities and fire hydrants. 
(3)	Driveways required to access neighborhood property. 
(c)	Landscaping required in side landscape strip. 
(1)	All portions of a side yard landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
(2)	Trees shall be provided within the side yard landscape strip at the rate of at least 1 tree unit for every 60 feet of length or portion thereof, or the side yard landscape strip may be planted in a continuous hedge (penetrated only by approved access drives and utility easements). Trees provided in a side landscaping strip shall be credited toward the tree conservation requirements of this Article. 
DIVISION II. - PARKING LOT AND LOADING AREA LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 808. - Parking lot plantings. 
Shade trees shall be provided within or adjacent to any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate 10 cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this Section. In addition to trees, landscaping is required within parking lots for 10 or more cars as provided in this Section, below. 
(a)	Landscape areas required. The following applies to any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate 10 cars or more. 
(1)	Landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be located within the parking lot and shall constitute at least 8% of the entire area devoted to parking spaces, aisles and connecting driveways. 
(2)	Landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be landscaped with any combination of such plant materials as trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those areas that are mulched. Such planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
(3)	As a minimum, a landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than 8 feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. 
(4)	Landscape islands between side-by-side parking spaces shall be no less than 8 feet in width and extend for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. Landscaping strips between head-to-head parking spaces shall be no less than 5 feet in width and provided with wheel stops in the parking spaces such that no vehicular overhang is permitted. 
(b)	Trees required. The following applies to any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate 10 cars or more. 
(1)	Shade trees shall be provided within or immediately adjacent to and surrounding the parking lot at a ratio of at least 1 tree unit for every 10 parking spaces, or portion thereof. 
(2)	Trees must be placed in or around the parking lot such that every parking space is within 50 feet of a shade tree. The 50-foot distance is measured from the center of the tree to any point within the parking space. 
(3)	New trees shall have a caliper of no less than 2 inches upon planting, and shall be maintained in good condition. Trees must be removed as a result of disease, damage or death, and must be replaced. 
(4)	All trees retained or provided under this Section may be counted toward the minimum tree density requirements of the tree conservation provisions of this Article). 
(c)	Tree planting areas. Tree planting areas shall be no less than 8 feet in width at their widest point and shall provide at least 172 square feet of useable planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than 2 feet from the back of curb. All parking lot landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be curbed in accordance with County specifications. 
(d)	Parking lot lighting. Lighting standards in and surrounding parking lots shall not conflict with tree locations, considering the height and breadth of the trees normally achieved at maturity and their root systems. 
Sec. 809. - Street-side screening. 
Any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate 10 cars or more, and any area set aside for loading or unloading of trucks or vans, which are visible from a street right-of-way, must provide a landscaped visual screen of the parking lot or loading area that meets the requirements of this Section. 
(a)	Visual screening required. Decorative visual screening that is 100% opaque shall be provided to a height of 3 feet above the elevation of the parking/loading area or the street, whichever is highest. If the parking/loading area is 3 feet or more below the street shoulder at a point no less than 10 feet or more than 20 feet from the street right-of-way line, no screening is required. 

(b)	Screening alternatives. 
(1)	The decorative visual screening may be provided in any of the following ways: 
a.	Planted only. A hedge consisting of at least a single row of shrubs planted 3 feet on center that will spread into a continuous visual screen within 2 growing seasons. Shrubs must be at least 18 inches tall at the time of planting, and be certified by a registered Landscape Architect to be of a species that will normally exceed 3 feet in height at maturity and are suitable for the parking lot application. The hedge must be set back at least 4 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
b.	Earthen berm. An earthen berm constructed to a height of 3 feet above the adjacent elevation of the street or parking/loading area, whichever is highest, shall not exceed a slope of 50% (1 foot of vertical rise for every 2 feet of horizontal run) and shall have a crown of at least 2 feet. The berm shall be planted in ground covers and other plant materials to achieve a decorative effect to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning & Development Director. 
c.	Wall. A wall of brick, stone or finished and textured concrete may be constructed to the required height and opacity, and landscaped with plant material to achieve a decorative effect to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning & Development Director. The wall must be set back at least 4 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
d.	Combination. Any combination of hedge, berm or wall that effectively provides a visual screen of the parking lot or loading area to a height of 3 feet and achieves a decorative effect through appropriate use of landscaping and plant material. 
(c)	Obstructions to sight distance. All landscaping and other screening devices placed along street rights-of-way and driveways must be designed and installed in a manner consistent with the requirements of this Development Code regarding vision clearance in sight triangles at street intersections with driveways and other streets. 

DIVISION III. - BUFFERS BETWEEN INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES 

Sec. 810. - Buffers; where required. 
A buffer shall be required between any multi-family or nonresidential development project along a side or rear lot line that abuts a less intense land use, as follows: 
TABLE 8.2. SITUATIONS WHERE BUFFER REQUIRED 

 
■ = Buffer required 
(1)	A buffer must be provided between any multi-family use (townhouses, apartments or mobile home park) and any agricultural zoning district or single-family or two-family use or zoning district; 
(2)	A buffer must be provided between any office or commercial use and any agricultural zoning district or any single-family, two-family or multi-family use or zoning district; and 
(3)	A buffer must be provided between any industrial use and any agricultural zoning district or any single-family, two-family, multi-family, office or commercial use or zoning district. 
Sec. 811. - Buffers; when required. 
Buffers are required to be created at the time of construction of any new development. 
Sec. 812. - Buffer design standards. 
(a)	General. Buffer areas shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, storm-water detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except for a fence, wall, or earthen berm constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this Code. Underground utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this Code will be subsequently achieved. Vehicular access through a buffer may be allowed only as a condition of rezoning, special use or Master Planned Development approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)	Width of Buffer. 
(1)	Buffers required along any lot line shall be no less than the minimum required width as shown on Table 4.4 in the Lot and Building Standards Article of this Development Code. 
(2)	When a proposed development adjoins an existing development but the full width of the required buffer does not exist, the new development shall provide a buffer of adequate width to meet the full width required on Table 4.4 when considered in combination with any existing buffer on the property of the adjoining development. 
(c)	Minimum Required Screening. Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or a structural buffer, whichever provides an opaque visual screen to a height of 6 feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can reasonably be expected to create an opaque visual screen 6 feet high within two growing seasons. 
(d)	Natural buffers. Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
(e)	Structural buffers. Structural buffers shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)	Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer around any fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(2)	All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope of 50% (1 foot of vertical rise to 2 feet of horizontal run). Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(3)	Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree unit for each 30 feet of buffer length or portion thereof. New deciduous trees shall have a caliper of no less than 2 inches upon planting, and new evergreens shall be at least 5 feet tall when planted. Trees may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(4)	Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be located no closer to the property line than 2 feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location and design. 
(5)	Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with waterproofing material. 
(6)	The accompanying Figure 8.1 provides examples of natural and structural buffers. Other solutions meeting the minimum requirements of this Section are also acceptable. 

Figure 8.1. Examples of Buffers 
Sec. 813. - Maintenance of buffers. 
Every buffer required by this Article shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque visual screen to a height of 6 feet on a continuous, year-round basis. 
Sec. 814. - Buffer modifications. 
(a)	Automatic reduction in buffer width. If a structural buffer is provided that creates an opaque screen to a height of no less than 8 feet instead of 6, the buffer may be reduced to a width of no less than 50% of the buffer width otherwise required, but no less than 10 feet. 
(b)	Location of buffers. Buffers may be relocated on the site to best achieve the screening required. 
(c)	Waiver for unnecessary buffers. The Board of Commissioners may waive a buffer requirement or reduce its extent to a temporarily appropriate level of screening if the Comprehensive Plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category such that a buffer would not be required by this Code once the adjoining property is rezoned or developed. 
DIVISION IV. - TREE CONSERVATION 

Sec. 815. - Tree conservation; intent and findings. 
(a)	Intent. The intent of this Division is to provide standards for the protection or replacement of trees as part of the land development and building construction process within Jackson County; to make the County an attractive place to live and to provide a healthy living environment; to better maintain control of storm water runoff, noise, glare, and soil erosion; and to preserve, protect, and promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the public. 
(b)	Findings. 
(1)	Trees provide food and shelter for wildlife. 
(2)	Trees reduce noise, glare and provide wind breaks. 
(3)	Trees, through transpiration, purify the air. 
(4)	Trees intercept airborne particulate matter and reduce some air pollutants. 
(5)	Trees provide oxygen and reduce the level of carbon monoxide in the air. 
(6)	Trees are vital in erosion control, soil conservation, and the reduction in storm water runoff. 
(7)	Trees moderate the climate. 
(8)	Trees increase property value. 
(9)	Trees provide aesthetic amenity. 
(10)	Trees improve the quality of water. 
Sec. 816. - Tree conservation; where required. 
Tree conservation in accordance with the provisions of this Division shall be applied to every activity that requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit under this Code, except for activities otherwise exempted by the provisions of this Division. 
(a)	Application to new development or new disturbed areas. 
(1)	Residential subdivisions. 
a.	Residential subdivisions shall achieve the tree density required under this Division on a lot-by-lot basis, provided that all areas required to remain undisturbed by this Development Code shall not be disturbed during development of the subdivision. Achievement of the tree density requirement may be met with tree plantings on the subdivision lots as the houses are constructed. At a minimum, each builder must fully meet the tree density requirements of this Division prior to approval of a Certificate of Occupancy. As an alternative, the developer may meet the requirements for the total subdivision at the time of development permitting in lieu of lot-by-lot compliance. 
b.	The owner/builder/contractor of each individual lot is responsible jointly and severably for compliance with the tree conservation provisions of this Division. 
(2)	[New commercial and industrial subdivisions.] New commercial and industrial subdivisions are subject to a two-staged review process by the County (for the infrastructure and later for each individual lot). For this reason, these subdivisions may base tree density calculations on the net disturbed site area defined by the limits of clearance and construction) the phase 1 plan shall address the method and timing of ultimate compliance with this Division. 
(3)	Nonresidential out-lots. Out-lots and separate parcels of a phased-unit development must collectively meet minimum requirements for site density; however, in no case may an individual out-lot have less than 10 tree units per acre. 
(4)	Additions to Existing Projects. For additions to existing projects, the density requirements may be met in one of the following ways: 
a.	Calculate the area of any new land disturbance and/or improvements and add replacement trees based on that area (existing trees elsewhere on the site may not be counted with this option); or, 
b.	Base density requirements on the total site area and count any existing trees on the site (subject to the restrictions of the next Section). 
(5)	Phased Projects and Reduced Net Site Areas. 
a.	Where development is going to occur in phases (by design or by implication), density calculations must be based on a site area defined by an established or estimated phase line. 
b.	Similarly, a reduced net site area may be achieved by using only the area of actual site disturbance (new projects only), provided that limits of construction line is clearly shown on the plan (existing trees elsewhere on the site may not be counted with this option). 
c.	In both instances, the following criteria are applied regarding existing trees: 
1.	Existing trees to be counted toward meeting the density requirements should be within the phase line or limits of construction. 
2.	If the tree save areas must be established outside these areas, they must be located where future development will not impact them. 
3.	The trees in areas outside the phase line or limits of construction may not be counted toward the density requirement of subsequent phases or new projects. 
(b)	Exemptions from tree conservation requirements. The tree conservation requirements shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Public utility companies and government agencies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on sites for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility and governmental services and unobstructed passage on public streets. 
(2)	Agricultural activities. Property in use for agricultural tree harvesting (as defined by this Code) or other agricultural activities (as defined by this Code), provided that the requirements of the Timbering and Forestry Section of the Restrictions on Particular Uses Article of this Development Code are met. 
(c)	Clearing and/or grading only permits. 
(1)	When seeking a limited land disturbance permit (i.e. clearing, clearing and grading, or grading only), it is necessary for applicants to show compliance with the required tree density factor. 
(2)	If trees exist on the site, the required density should be met with those trees. If this cannot be done, replacement trees are required. A replacement tree plan must be a part of the approved clearing and/or grading plan unless documentation is submitted to the County indicating that application for a full land disturbance permit will be made within one year of the grading plan approval date. 
Sec. 817. - Trees to be provided or retained. 
(a)	Number of tree units upon completion of development. 
(1)	Tree units required. Upon completion of development or construction of each house on a lot in a residential subdivision, all residential lots and all multi-family or nonresidential uses or development projects, shall have retained or planted a number of tree units per acre of development site or disturbed area, whichever is less, as shown on Table 8.3. The limits of grading activity shall establish the extent of land disturbance, except for those areas excluded under this Section. 
TABLE 8.3. TREE UNITS REQUIRED UPON COMPLETION 

 
*Per acre of development site or disturbed area, whichever is less, but not including Excluded Areas.  **This is equivalent to the planting of 5 new 2-inch caliper trees. 
(2)	Excluded areas. The calculation of development site or disturbed area shall exclude any area within a greenway or buffer required by this Article, and any area contained within a utility easement, wetland or area of special flood hazard. Neither the land area of these excluded areas, nor the trees that are or will be located within them, count toward the number of tree units required on or provided for the site. 
(3)	Trees meeting tree unit requirements. All trees planted or retained on the site, except for trees planted or retained within an Excluded Area as defined under this Section, shall be counted toward the minimum tree units required by Table 8.3 on the site in accordance with the values shown on Table 8.1. 
(b)	Tree inventories and surveys. 
(1)	All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried. Trees in Excluded Areas need not be inventoried. 
(2)	Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas greater than 2 acres in extent, subject to prior approval of the County. 
(3)	Specimen Trees must be shown on the plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed. Accurate locations are requested when the preservation of a specimen tree is questionable, or when a site design alteration is required by the County. Approximate locations are acceptable otherwise. 
(c)	Specimen trees. 
(1)	Preservation. 
a.	Jackson County strongly advocates the preservation of specimen trees. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees that are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be 2 times the assigned unit value shown in Table 8.1 when using the extraordinary measures associated with protecting and assuring the survival of such trees. 
b.	When the critical root zone of a specimen tree located off-site may be affected by proposed construction activities, tree protection devices are to be installed around the critical root zone of the specimen tree on the property under construction. Location of these off-site specimen trees will be determined by the County. 
(2)	Removal and replacement. 
a.	If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to and approved by the County. 
b.	Any specimen tree that is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the County must be replaced by the person responsible for the removal by trees with a total density equal to 2 times the unit value of the tree removed. [4] The replacement trees shall be in addition to any trees designated to meet the requirements for the project under 817(a), above. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. 
(d)	Tree replacement standards. 
(1)	Introduction. 
a.	The following section establishes standards by which plans and field conditions are to be evaluated to determine compliance with the tree replacement intent of this Code. 
b.	Tree replacement plans should be prepared with appropriate consideration given to the function of trees in the urban landscape. Every effort should be made to maximize the environmental benefit of the plant material. 
(2)	Planting specifications. 
a.	Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
b.	Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual or similar publication. Reference may also be made to the American Association of Nurserymen publication American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANS1260.1, 1996 or latest edition) for plant material quality specifications. Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books) or similar publication for information on tree species site requirements. 
(3)	Species. 
a.	Species selected as replacement trees must be quality specimens, and must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. To insure diversity, a minimum of 4 species of tree shall be used. Sites requiring limited replacement shall be evaluated by the County to allow use of fewer species. 
b.	Flowering ornamental species are typically not acceptable for use in meeting density requirements. 
c.	Where trees must be added to achieve the required tree units per acre for the site, pines may not comprise more than 50 percent of the required units. Where existing pines already comprise 50 percent or more of the required units, no more pines may be credited toward the required units. 
d.	Trees shall only be awarded credit toward the required tree units on the site when situated in areas where they may grow to mature height without pruning. 
(4)	Minimum root zones. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria must be observed unless otherwise approved by the County: 
a.	Overstory trees: 162 sq. ft. of pervious root zone. 
b.	Understory trees: 100 sq. ft. of pervious root zone. 
c.	All planting strips: 5 ft. minimum width. 
(5)	Irrigation. Newly planted trees and existing trees subjected to construction impacts typically need supplemental watering when rainfall is inadequate. Applicants should be prepared to discuss how trees are to be watered during their establishment or transition period, and shall note on the plan the method of irrigation that is proposed and attendant facilities. For hand watering, for instance, the location of hose bibs must be indicated; automatic systems require a back flow preventer approved by the County. 
(6)	Public street rights-of-way. Trees shall not be planted within any public street right-of-way. 
(7)	Placement of trees. The replacement trees on a property shall be placed reasonably uniformly throughout the disturbed area, subject to professional standards of design. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
For example, the removal of a 30-inch DBH tree would require replacement of fifteen 2-inch caliper trees or ten 3-inch caliper trees of a comparable species. 

Sec. 818. - Protection of existing trees. 
For existing trees that are proposed to be retained in order to meet the minimum requirements of this Code, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)	Damage prohibited. No person shall: 
(1)	Cut, carve, or otherwise damage or remove any tree except in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)	Attach any wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance harmful to any tree. 
(3)	Allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, paint) to come in contact with them. 
(4)	Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(b)	Construction standards. 
(1)	Purpose of tree protection devices. Tree protection devices are necessary to eliminate activities detrimental to trees including but not limited to: 
a.	Soil compaction in the critical root zone resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
b.	Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching; 
c.	Wounds to exposed roots, trunks or limbs by mechanical equipment; 
d.	Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
(2)	Location and types of tree protection devices. 
a.	Tree protection devices are to be installed as shown on the plan or otherwise completely surrounding the critical root zone. 
b.	The plan shall indicate whether the tree protection device is to be active or passive. 
c.	Active protection (see Materials section below) is required where Tree Save Areas are located in proximity to construction activity. 
d.	The locations of all tree protection devices will be verified prior to the issuance of the construction permit for clearing and/or grading. 
e.	Once Protected Zones are established and approved, any changes are subject to County review. 
(3)	Materials. Active tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material (see Appendix D, Standard Details 302 and 303). 
(4)	Sequence of installation and removal. All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. The County must inspect the installation of tree protection and erosion and sedimentation control devices prior to the issuance of the Construction Permit. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development, but is to be removed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(5)	Other specifications. 
a.	Clearing. Where clearing has been approved, trees shall be removed in a manner which does not adversely impact the trees to be preserved. Avoid felling trees into protection zones or disturbing roots inside the protection zones. Roots shall be cut cleanly before tree removal. 
b.	Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed in a manner which will not result in the accumulation of sediment in a tree protection zone. 
c.	Signage. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "Tree Save Area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced-in area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. 
d.	Signs requiring subcontractor cooperation and compliance with the tree protection standards shall be posted at site entrances. 
(c)	Prohibited activities. 
(1)	Compaction prohibited. All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above-ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable, the critical root zone shall first be cut cleanly, then immediately mulched with a 4 inch layer of processed bark or wood chips or a 6 inch layer of straw. 
(2)	Grade change prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone. Stripping of topsoil in the critical root zone shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system. Deposition of sediment in the critical root zone shall be prevented by placement of sediment barriers, which shall be backed by 2 × 4 inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
(3)	Ditches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch or trench within the critical root zone. Where such encroachment is unavoidable, ditches or trenches shall be so located as to minimize root damage. If roots must be cut, they must be cut cleanly and immediately mulched. 
(4)	Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the critical root zone. 
Sec. 819. - Alternative compliance. 
(a)	Overview. 
(1)	The intent of the Tree Conservation provisions of this Code is to insure that a minimum density of trees is maintained on all developed sites. Occasionally, this intent cannot be met because a project site will not bear the required density of trees. To provide a viable alternative for such cases, the developer may be allowed to plant trees on an alternate site or to contribute to the Tree Replacement Fund in lieu of over-planting the site. 
(2)	The County must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall 100 percent of the required site density factor be met through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. 
(3)	The land disturbance permit will only be issued after the County has approved the request for alternate compliance. 
(b)	Tree replacement fund. Jackson County will accept donations that will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property. 
(1)	Calculating the contribution amounts. 
a.	Contribution calculations are based on 2-inch caliper replacement trees with a value of $250.00 each, representing the average size and cost, materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the Jackson County area. 
b.	To determine the appropriate contribution, first calculate the Density Factor Deficit (DFD) or unit value that cannot be planted on the site. Divide the DFD by 0.5 (the unit value of a 2-inch caliper replacement tree) and multiply by $250.00. 
TREE REPLACEMENT FUND:  CALCULATING CONTRIBUTION AMOUNTS 

 
(2)	Fund administration. The Jackson County Tree Replacement Fund will be administered by the Finance Department. A report on the annual receipt and disposition of funds will be included in the County's annual audit. 
(c)	Alternate site tree planting. If trees are to be planted at another location, the following criteria must be observed: 
(1)	The off-site location shall be within the unincorporated area of Jackson County, shall be within a 2 mile radius of the project site, and shall not be a single-family residential property. 
(2)	Trees shall not be used to satisfy the tree density requirements of any other project. Trees may only be installed on property already developed or an area designated as a natural resource conservation area under the provisions of the Environmental Protection Article of this Code. 
(3)	The tree conservation plan for the project must also include a plan for the alternative site. 
DIVISION V. - LANDSCAPING PLANS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 820. - Site landscaping plans. 
(a)	Site landscaping plans; where required. 
(1)	Landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans are required upon application for a development permit or for a building permit for new construction of buildings in any development to which landscaping, screening, buffer or tree conservation requirements apply. 
(2)	In cases where approval of the landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans would cause harmful delay to the start of construction, the Director of Planning & Development may authorize the Building Inspector to issue footing and foundation permits for the project so that construction may proceed. 
(3)	Permits for construction beyond the footing and foundation shall not be issued until the landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans have been submitted and approved. 
(b)	Site landscaping plans; criteria. The technical specifications for landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans are found under the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code. 
(c)	Exemptions from site landscaping plan requirements. 
(1)	Tree conservation plans shall not be required for single-family and two-family subdivisions, or for individual single-family and two-family lots. 
(2)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to structures for which site landscaping plans have previously been submitted and approved. 
(3)	Site landscaping plans shall be required for only that phase of development for which the development permit or building permit is being requested. 
Sec. 821. - Plant materials; standards. 
(a)	Acceptable plant materials. The following are the minimum plant sizes and conditions to be used in satisfying the requirements of this Article. Acceptable plant materials for landscaping, buffers and tree replacement shall be as approved by a Georgia registered Landscape Architect or the County. 
(1)	New plant materials. 
a.	Medium shrubs (those having a mature height of 4 feet or less), 18 × 24 inch balled and burlapped or 2-gallon container. 
b.	Large shrubs (those having a mature height greater than 4 feet), 24 × 30 inch balled and burlapped or 3-gallon container. 
c.	Ground cover, 2½ inch pot. 
d.	Trees as required to meet the requirements of the tree conservation plan. 
(2)	The American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association for Nurserymen, may be referred to for the determination of plant standards. 
(3)	Existing trees that are to be retained to satisfy the requirements of this Code shall meet the following standards: 
a.	For trees, the size shall be at least 3 inches DBH. 
b.	Trees shall be free from mechanical and natural injuries, insect infestations and disease. 
c.	Trees shall be protected from injury to roots, trunks and branches during grading and construction. Protective fencing, tree wells, or retaining walls shall be utilized where necessary to insure tree vigor upon completion of construction. 
(b)	Approval of plant materials. Approval of a proposal to use a specific landscaping or buffer material shall be subject to a determination by a Georgia registered Landscape Architect or the County that the proposed material is the most appropriate for: 
(1)	The specific location, given surrounding land uses and the type of screening used on nearby properties, and 
(2)	The specific topography, soil, existing vegetation, and other factors that may influence the effectiveness of a screen material. 
Sec. 822. - Installation and maintenance of plant materials. 
(a)	Installation of plant materials. 
(1)	Plant materials, as required by the provisions of this Article, shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The County may allow one planting season in a twelve-month period in which the installation of plant materials shall be completed, subject to the performance security requirements, below. 
(2)	Buffers, if required, shall be installed before a Certificate of Occupancy is granted; except where the weather is not suitable for planting, and escrow provisions are made in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
(3)	Performance surety. 
a.	In such cases as when planting stock availability is low or weather conditions are not appropriate for planting new trees, the project owner may postpone planting for up to 6 months; provided that performance security is posted with Jackson County in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.	Security shall be in cash and submitted to the County for escrow, with the appropriate documentation or letter of credit. 
2.	Security shall be provided in an amount equal to 150 percent of the cost of materials, installation and guarantee as demonstrated by a signed contract between the owner and a qualified landscape contractor, and as approved by the County. 
b.	An inspection shall be made by the County of all tree plantings to assure compliance with plan requirements prior to release of the performance security. The performance security will be drawn upon by Jackson County at the time of expiration if the planting requirements have not been fulfilled, or if the owner has not requested an extension. One 6-month extension may be permitted with documented justification acceptable to the Director of Transportation & Public Works. Any inspections performed after the final inspection (for project release) are subject to reinspection fee schedules. 
(4)	Maintenance bond. 
a.	For multi-family and nonresidential development, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or prior to release of a performance surety provided under this Section (whichever last occurs), a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the County is required for all plant materials installed as a result of the requirements of this Article. The developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all such plant materials for two years from the date of acceptance of the maintenance bond. 
b.	The value of the Maintenance Bond shall be equal to 10 percent of the actual cost of installation of the plant materials. The cost of installation shall be evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the County. 
(b)	Maintenance of required plant materials. 
(1)	The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severably responsible for the maintenance in good condition of the plant materials used to meet the minimum requirements of this Article for landscaping, buffer or tree conservation. This responsibility is in addition to and survives the release of any maintenance bond provided for the property by the developer. The plant materials shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(2)	Plants that are diseased, unsurvivably damaged or are dead shall be removed and replaced with a plant of the same species, variety or cultivator, as acceptable to the County. 
(3)	Other landscape materials shall be maintained in proper repair and shall be kept clear of refuse and debris. 
ARTICLE 9. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Sec. 901. - Purpose of Chapter [Article] 9. 
This Article sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment within the County, including restrictions on the use of land near certain rivers and streams, within water supply watersheds, within groundwater recharge areas susceptible to pollution, and in wetlands in order to: 
(1)	Protect the drinking water quality of the rivers, streams, reservoirs and aquifers that supply water to the residents of the jurisdiction and the State; 
(2)	Protect the natural habitat of animal and plant life relative to water resources; and 
(3)	Protect valuable water-related and other natural resources, to help control erosion and river sedimentation, for contribution to drought management, and to help absorb flood waters. 
Sec. 902. - Definitions related to environmental protection. 
Aquifer [means] any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
DHR [means] the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
DNR [means] the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD [means] the Georgia Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Greenway [means] an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Groundwater Recharge Area [means] the land area where the water that eventually seeps down into an aquifer first enters the ground. 
Impermeable [means] something (such as a layer of rock) that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious Surface [means] a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface, such as a building, paved road or driveway, parking lot, deck, swimming pool or patio. 
Perennial Stream [means] a stream that flows throughout the whole year. Perennial streams may be identified as shown as such on a United States Geologic Service Quad map. 
Pollution Susceptibility [means] the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in a recharge area. 
Protected River. A "protected river" is any perennial river or watercourse that has an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by the State. In Jackson County, protected rivers are the North Oconee River, the Middle Oconee River, and the Mulberry River. 
Recharge Area [means] any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
River Bank [means] the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Sensitive Natural Area [means] any area, as identified now or hereafter by DNR, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)	Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)	Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)	Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)	Other areas so designated by DNR; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
State Waters [means] any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Surface Mining [means] any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores, and dimension stone, and other solid matter for sale or for processing or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. 
Trout Streams [means] all streams or portions of streams as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
(1)	Primary Trout Waters [means] streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
(2)	Secondary Trout Waters [means] streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
(3)	First Order Trout Waters [means] streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Water Supply Reservoir [means] a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned drinking water systems. This definition specifically excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water Supply Watershed [means] the area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Water Quality Critical Area [means] the Water Quality Critical Area shall comprise all lands within the Water Supply Watershed District. 
Wetlands [means] freshwater areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetlands, Protected, [means] those wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or otherwise approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based on competent studies prepared by a registered and qualified professional engineer. 
DIVISION I. - RIVER AND STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION 
The provisions of this Division are adopted pursuant to the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, adopted by DNR under O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, and the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 

Sec. 903. - Protected rivers and streams; defined. 
The following rivers and streams are declared to be protected rivers and streams and are regulated under the provisions of this Division: 
(1)	"River corridors" are established in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)	A "protected river" is any perennial river or watercourse that has an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. Protected rivers have been identified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and include the Middle Oconee, North Oconee and Mulberry Rivers. 
(3)	Primary, secondary and first order trout streams, as designated by DNR. 
(4)	All other perennial streams and state waters, other than "protected rivers" or "trout streams." 
Sec. 904. - River corridors; restrictions. 
(a)	Permits. All persons desiring to undertake a permitted activity within a river corridor as mapped in the Comprehensive Plan, must first obtain a permit from Jackson County. Permit applications are to be filed according to procedures outlined within this Development Code. 
(b)	Appeals. A variance may be approved if such approval is not contrary to the public interest and where because of a special characteristic of the property and the activity, a literal enforcement of provisions of this Code will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. Appeal procedures are detailed under Appeals Article of this Development Code. 
(c)	Existing Industrial and commercial land uses. Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the effective date of this Development Code are exempt from the protection criteria of this code, except as specifically prohibited under this Article, provided that: 
(1)	The use of the river corridor does not impair the drinking quality of the river water; and 
(2)	The activity within the river corridor meets all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
Sec. 905. - Protected rivers and streams; restrictions. 
(a)	Protected rivers. A natural vegetative greenway is established along both sides of the Middle Oconee, North Oconee and Mulberry Rivers, as follows: 
(1)	The greenway shall include all lands within 100 feet of each protected river, inclusive of any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbank. See Section 906, below. 
(2)	No land may be used, and no vegetation shall be disturbed, within the greenway by building construction, development activity, septic tanks or septic tank drainfields, the handling of hazardous wastes, or for any other purpose except for the following permitted uses: 
a.	A land use existing prior to the adoption of this Development Code. 
b.	A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
1.	The dwelling is located on a lot having an area of at least 5 acres, not including any area that lies between the riverbanks. 
2.	Only 1 dwelling is located on the lot. 
3.	No septic tank or septic tank drainfield may be located within the greenway. 
c.	Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
2.	Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
d.	Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8 (as amended) of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) [O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8]. 
e.	Public road and utility crossings meeting all requirements of the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
f.	Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification. 
g.	Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative greenway or with river-dependent recreation, such as a boat ramp. 
h.	Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
2.	Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act. 
i.	Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
j.	Utilities, other than public water or sewerage facilities, provided that: 
1.	The utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank as reasonably possible. 
2.	Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the greenway as well as is reasonably possible. 
3.	Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
k.	Other uses permitted by DNR under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act that are also allowed by the property's zoning classification. 
(3)	The natural vegetative greenway shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the greenway. 
(b)	[Repealed by Ord. No. 10-07] 
(c)	Other protected streams and state waters. For all state waters other than protected rivers and trout streams; the following shall apply: 
(1)	All perennial streams located within a water supply watershed must comply with the natural greenway and setback requirements established for streams in the watershed. See Sec. 908, "Water supply watersheds; restrictions" of this Development Code. 
(2)	For all other perennial streams and other state waters, land disturbance within buffers shall be regulated by Sec. 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control" of this Development Code. 
(d)	Recordation of restrictions. Restrictions shall be noted on the plats and deeds of included properties to maintain any designated natural greenway area, undisturbed area or construction setback required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, §§ 1a, b, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 906. - Greenways. 
Unless more restrictive requirements under this Code apply, all perennial streams and other state waters shall be provided with a natural vegetative greenway as follows: 
(a)	Minimum width of greenway. 
(1)	The minimum greenway width must be provided along any protected river as required under Section 905(a), "protected rivers;" and 
(2)	The minimum greenway width of 25 feet must be provided along any protected stream within any water supply watershed and around any reservoir, as required under Section 908, "water supply watersheds; restrictions;" and 
(3)	For all other perennial streams and state waters, the greenway is to be established as required by Section 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control," of this Development Code. 
(b)	Minimum setback for land disturbance. All clearing, earth moving, construction and ground disturbance must remain at least 50 feet from the edge of any greenway. Exceptions include bike and footpaths constructed of permeable material, gravity sanitary sewers, and road crossings perpendicular to streams. The installation of storm sewers will also be allowed. The area that is within this restricted construction area is to be left natural or developed as a trail with a minimum of disturbance to the natural habitat. 
(c)	Protection of greenways. 
(1)	Except as specifically provided otherwise in this section, a greenway required by this section shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation, and no land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a greenway. Land disturbing activities within greenways are further regulated as follows: 
a.	No land disturbance shall be permitted within a stream buffer required by Sec. 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control" of this Development Code, unless the EPD Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, or where otherwise allowed by the EPD Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
b.	Outside of stream buffers required by Sec. 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control" of this Development Code, land disturbing activities within such greenways shall only be permitted in cases, as determined by EPD, where a drainage structure or a roadway structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
c.	A greenway shall be included within a conservation easement that meets the requirements of this Article. 
d.	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, that portion of a greenway outside of stream buffers required by Sec. 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control" of this Development Code, may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation, consistent with the terms of any applicable conservation easement, as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
e.	Any person constructing a single family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in that part of a greenway outside of stream buffers required by Sec. 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control" of this Development Code, at any time, consistent with the terms of any applicable conservation easement, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed." 
(2)	A greenway is to be included within a conservation easement that meets the requirements of this Article. 
(3)	Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a greenway may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation, consistent with the terms of any applicable conservation easement, as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(4)	Any person constructing a single family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a greenway at any time, consistent with the terms of any applicable conservation easement, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, §§ 1c, d, 4-19-2010) 
DIVISION II. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS 
The provisions of this Division are adopted pursuant to the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, adopted by DNR under O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 907. - Establishment of water supply watersheds. 
(a)	Water supply watershed districts; established. Five water supply watershed districts are hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Bear Creek, Curry Creek Reservoir, Grove Creek Reservoir, Sandy Creek Reservoir and the proposed Little Curry Creek reservoir. 
(b)	Permit required. Within the Water Supply Watershed Districts, no land-disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified in this Section, may be conducted without a permit from Jackson County. 
Sec. 908. - Water supply watersheds; restrictions. 
The Bear Creek, Curry Creek, Grove Creek, Sandy Creek and Little Curry Creek watersheds are recognized as small water supply watersheds, having less than 100 square miles of drainage area above the water supply intakes. 
(a)	Protected watersheds. 
(1)	Protected watershed areas; defined. All lands within the designated watersheds located upstream from the public water supply intakes (including the reservoirs) are established as protected watershed areas. 
(2)	Protected watershed areas; exemptions. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
a.	Silviculture. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, forestry practices, in accordance with a forest management plan that incorporates best management practices (BMPs) approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission, shall be permissible. Silviculture activities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
b.	Agriculture. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the continued cultivation of agricultural crops and the occasional pasturing of livestock shall be permissible, provided that the best management practices (BMPs) of the Georgia Department of Agriculture are followed. Agricultural activities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(3)	Protected watershed areas; restrictions. Within a protected watershed area: 
a.	Impervious surface area. The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities or facilities, of the entire watershed protection area shall be limited to 25%. The Board of Commissioners must approve any individual development that will result in more impervious surface than 25% of the total area of the property as a special use. See the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code for approval of special uses. 
b.	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
c.	New sanitary landfills, if permitted by DNR, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
d.	Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
e.	Agricultural waste. The application of animal waste on land must follow guidelines established by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation Service, Agricultural Best Management Practices. 
f.	[Deleted 2-13-2006] 
g.	Street runoff and drainage. New streets that cross perennial streams within the protected watershed areas shall be designed in such a way as to avoid direct runoff from the paved surface into the streams they cross. Such design features shall be shown on the site plan. 
(b)	Reservoir protection. A natural greenway shall be established and maintained within 150 feet of the banks of any public water supply reservoir boundary within the protected watershed area. Vegetation, land disturbance and land uses shall be controlled by the provisions of the applicable Reservoir Management Plan, as approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(c)	Protected stream corridors; restrictions. 
(1)	Primary protected stream corridor. Within a 7-mile radius upstream of the Bear Creek, Curry Creek, Grove Creek, Sandy Creek and Little Curry Creek reservoirs, all lands within 150 feet of the banks on both sides of any perennial stream shall be established as a protected stream corridor, which shall conform to the following provisions: 
a.	A natural greenway shall be established and maintained within 100 feet of both sides of the stream banks; 
b.	No impervious surface shall be constructed within 50 feet of the greenway; and 
c.	Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the protected stream corridor. 
(2)	Secondary protected stream corridor. Beyond a 7-mile radius upstream of the Bear Creek, Curry Creek, Grove Creek, Sandy Creek and Little Curry Creek reservoirs, all lands within 100 feet of the banks on both sides of any perennial stream shall be established as a protected stream corridor, which shall conform to the following provisions: 
1.	A natural greenway shall be established and maintained within 50 feet of both sides of the stream banks; 
2.	No impervious surface shall be constructed within 50 feet of the greenway; and 
3.	Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the protected stream corridor. 
DIVISION III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 
The provisions of this Division are adopted pursuant to the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, adopted by DNR under O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 909. - Protected groundwater recharge areas; defined. 
Groundwater recharge areas are defined as "significant recharge areas" by the State of Georgia and are protected relative to their susceptibility to pollution. 
(a)	Significant recharge areas. Significant recharge areas are defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition, or as may be amended by DNR from time to time). 
(b)	Pollution susceptibility category. Categories of relative vulnerability of an aquifer to pollution (classified as higher, average or lower) are defined by the DNR using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 20 (as may be amended by DNR from time to time) along with the most significant recharge areas. 
Sec. 910. - Protected groundwater recharge area restrictions; general. 
Within any significant recharge area, as defined and delineated by the DNR, the following shall apply: 
(1)	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(2)	New sanitary landfills, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(3)	Any new facility that involves the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall perform such operations on an impermeable surface having a spill and leak collection system. 
(4)	Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
(5)	A new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tank must have secondary containment of 110% of the volume of the tank or 110% of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. This requirement does not apply to: 
a.	Any tank having a maximum capacity of less than 650 gallons; and, 
b.	Any tank used for agricultural purposes, provided it complies with all Federal requirements. 
Sec. 911. - Protected groundwater recharge area restrictions; by classification. 
(1)	All significant groundwater recharge areas within Jackson County are classified by DNR as having "lower" pollution susceptibility. 
(2)	Within a significant recharge area classified as having "lower" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
a.	New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 50 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of 1 foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
b.	A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 110% of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, or the minimum lot size otherwise required by the County Health Department, whichever is greater. 
c.	A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 110% of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, or the minimum lot size otherwise required by the County Health Department, whichever is greater. 
DIVISION IV. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 
The provisions of this Division are adopted pursuant to the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, adopted by DNR under O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 912. - Protected wetlands; defined. 
(1)	"Wetlands" are freshwater areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar freshwater areas. 
(2)	Protected wetlands are those wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or otherwise approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based on competent studies prepared by a registered and qualified professional engineer. 
(3)	Any new wetland area constructed as a best management practice for stormwater control is also considered a protected wetland once construction is complete. 
Sec. 913. - Wetlands map adopted. 
The National Wetlands Inventory Map prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service covering the county is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the official map of protected wetlands in the county. The NWI Map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under these regulations does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Sec. 914. - Protected wetlands; restrictions. 
Within any protected wetlands area, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Permit required for alteration. Alteration or degradation of a protected wetland requires prior approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, if applicable. Wetlands not falling under the jurisdiction of the Corps shall be subject to County permitting only. 
(b)	Prohibited land uses. 
(1)	Hazardous or toxic waste receiving, treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(2)	Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
(c)	Allowed land uses. Land uses that may be allowed if otherwise permitted by the zoning district and by the Section 404 permit include: 
(1)	Timber production and harvesting. 
(2)	Wildlife and fisheries management. 
(3)	Camping, hiking, hunting and fishing recreation activities. 
(4)	Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
(5)	Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
(d)	Conservation easement required. Any protected wetlands area that will be retained in any subdivision or development project is to be included within a conservation or natural resources easement that meets the requirements of this Article. 
Sec. 915. - Wetlands certification. 
Design professionals shall indicate wetlands on plans required for a land disturbance permit application. The design professional that prepared the required plans accompanying the permit application shall add a statement to the grading plan sheet indicating whether or not wetlands are located on the property by checking the appropriate box. The Wetlands Certification shall read as shown in Figure 9.1. 
FIGURE 9.1. WETLANDS CERTIFICATION 

 
Sec. 916. - Requirement for Local Permit. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within protected wetlands without written permission or a permit from the County. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands boundary, as determined using the National Wetlands Inventory Map, no land disturbance permit will be issued by the County until a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if the wetlands area falls under Corps jurisdiction. 
DIVISION V. - NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION AREAS 

Sec. 917. - Purposes of natural resource conservation. 
The purposes of this Division, among others, are as follows: 
(1)	To recognize the current development rights of property owners established through zoning; 
(2)	To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural features such as stream greenways, floodplains, and wetlands, by setting them aside from development; 
(3)	To support the continued viability of agricultural activities in the county, including crop production, dairying and managed forestry; 
(4)	To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing vegetation and encourage minimization of development on steep slopes; 
(5)	To enhance water quality of streams and waterways, and to protect valuable groundwater resources; 
(6)	To encourage conservation of scenic views and elements of the county's rural character, and to minimize perceived density, by minimizing views of new development from existing roads; and 
(7)	To provide notification to property owners of natural resources that must be protected on their property. 
Sec. 918. - Designation of conservation areas. 
(a)	Primary conservation areas. Primary Conservation Areas are defined as follows: 
(1)	Floodways within the 100-year floodplain. These areas are designated on maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and must be confirmed as to their specific location on the Preliminary Plat. 
(2)	Required river and stream greenways. Natural vegetative greenways along the banks of all protected rivers and perennial streams and other state waters, as required by this Article (except for activities that are exempt from the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of the Land Development Activities Article of this Code). 
(3)	Wildlife habitats of threatened or endangered species. The following have been identified by the Federal and/or the State governments as threatened or endangered species in Jackson County: 
TABLE 9.1. THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES IDENTIFIED IN JACKSON COUNTY 

 
Source: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
(4)	Wetlands and hydric soils classified as "unsuitable." Wetlands are illustrated generally on the Wetlands Inventory Maps published by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and are delineated by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. Soils classified as "unsuitable" often coincide with wetlands and include all soils designated under Group 6 by the Jackson County Health Department (see the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems). Soils in Jackson County are shown on the Soil Survey Maps prepared by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation Service). 
(5)	Additional flood hazard areas. All areas within the 100-year floodplain but lying outside any floodway, wetland or other designated Primary Conservation Area fall under this category. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain are designated as the "flood hazard area" on maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and must be confirmed as to their specific location on the Preliminary Plat. 
(b)	Secondary conservation areas. Secondary Conservation Areas are areas that are encouraged (but not required) to be protected in any major subdivision. These include: 
(1)	Areas greater than 5,000 square feet of steep slopes over 25%. Slopes greater than 25% can be identified from the topographic data required for the Preliminary Plat. Areas comprising 5,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
(2)	Areas greater than 40,000 square feet with slopes of 15% to 25%. Slopes between 15% and 25% can be identified from the topographic data required for the Preliminary Plat. Areas comprising 40,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
(3)	Soils with exposed bedrock or rock outcroppings greater than 40,000 sf. Areas with exposed bedrock or rock outcroppings must be identified through observation on each site. Areas comprising 40,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
(4)	Areas greater than 80,000 square feet with soils classified as "poorly drained." Soils classified as "poorly drained" include those designated as such under Group 4 and all soils designated under Group 5 by the Jackson County Health Department (see the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems). Soils in Jackson County are shown on the Soil Survey Maps prepared by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service. Such areas comprising 80,000 contiguous square feet or less are not considered Secondary Conservation Areas. 
(5)	Buffer areas around wetlands and habitats of endangered species. Additional lands in their natural state provided around designated wetlands and critical wildlife habitats as protective buffers are recognized as Secondary Conservation Areas. To qualify, a wetland buffer must extend at least 25 feet from the wetland, and a buffer around a wildlife habitat must be at least 100 feet deep. 
(6)	Mature timber stands or significant trees. Forests and timberlands that have developed mature stands of trees qualify for conservation consideration. Individual trees that are specimen trees or otherwise have significance through their size, age, species or historic value may be designated as a Secondary Conservation area to the extent of the tree's dripline. See Article 8, Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation. 
(7)	Registered historic or archeological assets. Sites or areas registered with the State or the National Register of Historic Places qualify under this category since preservation is desirable but not mandated by law. Information regarding all such sites is available from the Georgia Office of Historic Preservation. 
(8)	Viewshed protection areas. These areas are set aside either to screen the view of the subdivision development from abutting roadways or to protect existing scenic views into the subdivision site of rural heritage features. Examples of rural heritage features include the following: 
Rural Heritage Features Include: 

 
If intended to screen the subdivision development, the viewshed buffer must be adequately vegetated with trees and understory growth to provide an adequate screening effect. If intended to preserve a scenic view, the viewshed protection area must provide an adequate width or orientation in order to preserve the view. 
(9)	Village greens, parkways. These areas create neighborhood assets by providing open space and passive recreation close to the homes in a subdivision. A village green is an open space area surrounded by streets and/or building lots on at least three sides, and intended for common neighborhood use. A parkway is a narrow strip of open space surrounded by streets on all sides, intended as a landscaped element or passive recreation area for the neighborhood. 
(10)	Passive recreational areas. Common areas solely designated and improved for passive recreational activities, such as picnicking, walking, relaxation and repose, may be treated as Secondary Conservation Areas. Active recreation areas, including but not limited to golf courses, swimming pools, sports fields and courts, and community buildings and grounds are not considered conservation uses or conservation areas. 
Sec. 919. - Allowed uses in natural conservation areas. 
The following requirements apply only to land set aside for conservation in fulfillment of the provisions of this Article. 
(a)	Undisturbed areas. Certain areas identified as Primary or Secondary Conservation Areas shall remain in their natural, undisturbed state. Such undisturbed areas include floodways, stream greenways, viewshed buffers, critical wildlife habitats and buffers, wetlands and wetland buffers, and mature timber stands (except for managed forestry activities, including harvesting). 
(b)	Allowed uses in other areas. The following uses are allowed in natural resource conservation areas to the extent that they are compatible with the protection and preservation of areas required by law but not otherwise required to remain undisturbed, and are allowed uses under the site's zoning classification. 
(1)	Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example, woodland, open field, or managed meadow). 
(2)	Agricultural and horticultural uses, including raising crops, pasturelands and dairy operations, along with associated buildings (including residences) that are specifically needed to support an active, viable agricultural or horticultural operation. Specifically excluded are commercial livestock operations involving swine or poultry. 
(3)	Pastureland for horses used solely for recreational purposes. Equestrian facility buildings and grounds shall be permitted but may not be located in any Primary Conservation Area. 
(4)	Silviculture, in keeping with established standards for selective harvesting and sustained yield forestry, and best management practices endorsed by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(5)	Neighborhood open space uses such as village greens, commons, picnic areas, community gardens, trails, and similar low-impact passive recreational uses specifically excluding motorized off-road vehicles, rifle ranges, golf courses, sports fields and courts, community recreation buildings and grounds, swimming pools, and other active recreation uses. 
(6)	Pathways and trails, and passive recreation activities such as fishing, picnicking, and nature interpretation. 
(7)	Water supply and sewage disposal system reserve fields and stormwater detention areas designed, landscaped, and available for use as an integral part of the conservation area. The septic tank and drain field required for on-site sewage disposal must be located on the lot of the house it serves. Areas within a conservation area used for water supply, reserve fields or stormwater detention must be located outside of any Primary Conservation Area, and must be established by easements between the appropriate parties and recognized in the conservation easement covering the area. 
(8)	Easements for drainage, access, power, natural gas, sewer or water lines, or other public purposes, as approved by the County Engineer and in keeping with conservation of the areas they traverse. 
DIVISION VI. - CONSERVATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES EASEMENTS 

Sec. 920. - Conservation or natural resources easements; required. 
(a)	Primary conservation areas. All greenways required by this Article, all protected wetlands, and all other primary conservation areas in a subdivision or a master planned development that are required to be protected by the provisions of this Development Code, shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use as follows: 
(1)	By a natural resources easement in a conventional subdivision; or 
(2)	By a conservation easement in an open space subdivision or a master planned development. 
(b)	Secondary conservation areas. Lands in secondary conservation areas that are designated by the developer for protection shall be included within a natural resources or conservation easement. 
(c)	Ownership of land in conservation and natural resources easements. Land within conservation and natural resources easements may be included within the lots in a subdivision, or ownership may be transferred to a homeowners' association or to a nonprofit conservation organization or land trust organized under Georgia law. 
Sec. 921. - Natural resources easements. 
(a)	Natural resources easements; approval. The natural resources easement, when required, shall be shown on the final subdivision plat and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court at the same time as the final plat. 
(b)	Natural resources easements; guidelines. The following guidelines are required to be incorporated into any natural resources easement in a form acceptable to the County Attorney: 
(1)	The easement specifically and clearly identifies the boundaries of the property subject to the easement through reference to the easement area shown on the final subdivision plat; 
(2)	The easement contains restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifically delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations shall be consistent with the type of area protected and the applicable requirements of this Code to such areas, and may include but shall not be confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dumping, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and uses made of the property; 
(3)	The easement provides for the right of the County to inspect the property to assure observance of restrictions and also provides for enforcement procedures; 
(4)	The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered or terminated except with the express written permission of the County. 
Sec. 922. - Conservation easements. 
(a)	Conservation easements; approval. The conservation easement, when required, shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners and shall either be: 
(1)	Co-signed on behalf of the Board of Commissioners and donated to a private nonprofit conservation organization or land trust; 
(2)	Co-signed on behalf of the Board of Commissioners and donated to a nonprofit homeowners association; or 
(3)	Donated to Jackson County at the option of and if accepted by the Board of Commissioners. 
(b)	Conservation easements; guidelines. The conservation easement shall be created subject to the provisions of Article 1 of Chapter 10 of Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.], which is known as the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act." (Code 1981, § 44-10-1 et seq. enacted by Ga. L. 1992, p. 2227, § 1). The following guidelines are required to be incorporated into any conservation easement in a form acceptable to the County Attorney: 
(1)	The easement recognizes and describes in a statement of purpose the special qualities of the property subject to the easement. Conditions within the tract subject to the conservation easement may be shown by map and/or photograph; 
(2)	The easement clearly identifies the owner of the property subject to the easement, the holder of the easement, and co-signer, and the responsibilities of the property owner, easement holder, and co-signer; 
(3)	The easement specifically and clearly identifies the boundaries of the property subject to the easement, either by metes and bounds legal description or survey plat; 
(4)	The easement contains restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifically delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations shall be consistent with the type of area protected and the applicable requirements of this Code to such areas, and may include but shall not be confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dumping, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and uses made of the property; 
(5)	The easement provides for the right of the easement holder and co-signer to inspect the property to assure observance of restrictions and also provides for enforcement procedures; 
(6)	The easement provides for the maintenance of the open space; 
(7)	The easement provides for either enforcement rights or third party enforcement rights, vested in the homeowners' association or the land trust, as the case may be, and in Jackson County; and 
(8)	The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered or terminated except with the express written permission of all entities having either a property right or enforcement right in the easement. 
ARTICLE 10. - PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose of Article 10. 
This Article sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, including general principles of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
Sec. 1002. - Standards incorporated by reference. 
(a)	Standard Design Specifications. The Standard Design Specifications of Jackson County, also referred to in this Code as "Standard Details," as adopted by the Board of Commissioners and as may be amended from time to time are incorporated into this Code as though set forth within the body of this Code. In the case of a conflict between the Standard Design Specifications and the text of this Code, the text of this Code shall control. 
(b)	Traffic signs and street striping. The installation of all traffic control signs and street striping shall be governed by the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(c)	Georgia DOT standard specifications. Unless otherwise specially set forth in this Code or the Standard Design Specifications of Jackson County, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(d)	AASHTO design standards. Design criteria and standards not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the latest edition of the AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
(e)	Overlay District Standards. Design criteria and standards set forth in Article 5 shall supersede design standards set forth in the "Standard Details", Article 10 of this code, the current Transportation Plan, and current Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 15-005, 7-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 1003. - Interpretation of standards. 
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these standards, the following shall govern: 
(a)	Governing Standards. Whenever a provision of these standards or any provision in any law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind contains any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, the standards that are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(b)	Prior Acceptance of Construction Plans. Jackson County shall not modify or alter any development plans that have been filed with and accepted by the County prior to the effective date of this code. This exception shall be subject to the conditions and limitations under which said plans were accepted by the County. 
Sec. 1004. - Design exceptions and field changes. 
(a)	Request for Design Exception. When unique conditions and circumstances exist on a project, the developer's engineer may submit a request for design exception in a format provided by the Public Development Director. Design exceptions request should be identified as early as possible during the design process. The Public Development Director is the approval authority for design exceptions. 
(b)	Field changes. Minor changes in construction plans caused by field conditions shall be made at the direction of the Public Development Director with the cost of such changes to be paid by the developer. All changes are to be documented as revisions to the approved development plans and correctly shown on the as-built surveys. Discrepancies between the as-built surveys and the approved development plans may result in delays in approving final plats or certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1005. - General design standards. 
(a)	Suitability of the land. 
(1)	Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, topographic, geologic or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
(2)	Land within a proposed subdivision or development which is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess land. Lots that do not comply with the requirements of this Code are prohibited. 
(b)	Conservation. 
(1)	Development shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained to avoid substantial probabilities of: 
a.	Accelerated erosion. 
b.	Pollution, contamination, or siltation of lakes, rivers streams, and other water bodies. 
c.	Damage to vegetation. 
d.	Injury to wildlife and fish habitats. 
(2)	Development shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained to provide open space and to create a man-made environment for human use or occupancy compatible and harmonious with the natural environment and specific consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural topography, to preservation of existing vegetation, to retention of major land forms and to preservation of important vistas. 
(c)	Conformance to the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans. All highways, major thoroughfares, streets and other transportation facilities shall be platted by the developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or the Transportation Plan, whichever is the most recently adopted or amended. Expect when the development is located within an overlay district. The development of an overlay district development shall comply with Article 5. 
(d)	Name of subdivision or development project. The name of each subdivision or development project must have the approval of the Public Development Department. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development project in Jackson County or any of its cities. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(e)	Street names. 
(1)	Street names. 
a.	Proposed streets obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate existing street names in Jackson County or any of its cities, irrespective of the use of a suffix such as: street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court or other derivatives. 
b.	Street names are subject to approval by the Public Development Director. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(f)	Street Addresses. Street addresses shall be obtained from 911 and shall be shown upon each final plat. 
(g)	Blocks. 
(1)	Residential Blocks. 
a.	Unless otherwise approved by the Public Development Director under unusual circumstances, block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 400 feet in length. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	In blocks greater than 1,200 feet in length, the Public Development Director may require one or more public easements of not less than 20 feet in width to extend entirely across the block for pedestrian crosswalks, fire protection or utilities. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
c.	Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where reverse frontage lots on major thoroughfares are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, or where abutting upon limited access highways or railroads, or where other situations make this requirement impractical, in which case the Public Development Director may approve a single row of lots. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Nonresidential Blocks. Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for the prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and service. 
(h)	Lots. 
(1)	Minimum lot dimensions and areas. All lots shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of this Development Code for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
(2)	Authority of Health Department. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing the County Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this Development Code are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
[Previous paragraph (3) deleted by amendment 9-20-2004] 
(3)	Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain a site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements as set forth in this Code and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. 
(4)	Arrangement. All lot lines that intersect a street line shall be perpendicular or radial to said street lines unless not practical or desirable because of topographic or other features, such as the location of a stream or other natural feature that more appropriately may define a lot, or a property line that forms the periphery of a subdivision that is not perpendicular or radial to a street line. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the Director of Public Development at the time of Preliminary Plat approval or otherwise prior to recordation of the lot. In no case shall a lot be created that would require a variance to provide an adequate area to accommodate a normal principal building. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(5)	Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 

(6)	Through lots. Except where specifically required to provide reverse frontage separation from a County road or a State or U.S. numbered highway, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property, through lots (i.e., "double-frontage" lots) are to be avoided. 
(7)	Lot depth restrictions. Lots in any minor subdivision or major subdivision that front exclusively on, or gain their access from, an existing County road shall have a lot depth no greater than 5 times the lot width. This provision does not apply to any lot that is larger than 25 acres in size. 
(i)	Areas reserved for future development. If any portion of a tract is reserved for future subdivision development, the minimum lot width and frontage of the reserved area may be reduced to the width required for a future street to serve such area. Such a reserved area must be labeled "Reserved for Future Development" on the final subdivision plat, and the portion of the lot where a street will be built must be labeled "Future Street." Such a reserved area will not be eligible for issuance of a building permit unless the lot meets all requirements of this Development Code, including minimum lot width and frontage requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(j)	Plats & Developments Straddling Political Boundaries. Whenever access and/or services to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the Public Development Director may request assurance from the County Attorney, and/or the other county that access is legally established, and that the access road is adequately improved. In general, lot lines shall be laid out so as to not cross jurisdictional boundary lines. Any necessary intergovernmental agreements must be executed prior to the issuance of a Development Permit. The developer and/or property owner has an affirmative duty at the time of application for rezoning or development permit (if already appropriately zoned) application to request with the affected governments that they enter into an intergovernmental agreement process. The County makes no guarantee to enter into any intergovernmental agreement. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 3a, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1006. - Required improvements. 
(a)	Minor subdivisions. By definition, a minor subdivision does not involve the construction of major public improvements, such as new streets or storm water detention. However, the following improvements are required in order to adequately serve the lots and protect the safe operation of the existing road: 
(1)	Right-of-way shall be dedicated along the property's frontage from the centerline of the existing road equal to ½ of the minimum requirement for the classification of the road, as established in this Article. 
(2)	The potential location of a driveway connection serving each lot and meeting the requirements of these development regulations shall be indicated on the final subdivision plat. 
(3)	The storm water carrying capacity of the road, whether in an existing ditch or gutter, shall not be compromised. If the storm water characteristics of the existing road are inadequate to accommodate the new lots, the County Engineer may require improvement of the roadway ditch as appropriate. 
(4)	All lot corners shall be marked with an iron pipe or ½-inch iron pin at least 24 inches long and driven flush or no more than 1 inch above the finished grade. 
(5)	A publicly dedicated drainage easement is to be provided along any perennial stream or water impoundment in accordance with the requirements for watercourse and drainage easements under the Easements Section of this Article. 
(b)	Major subdivisions, multi-family and nonresidential developments. The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every major subdivision or individual multi-family or nonresidential development in accordance with the requirements and standards contained in this Article: 
(1)	Survey monumentation in accordance with Sec. 1008. 
(2)	Streets providing access to such a development and to all lots in such a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties, in accordance with Sec. 1010. 
a.	Streets contained wholly within such a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Article. Existing streets that adjoin such a development shall be improved to the minimum standards from the centerline of the street along the development's frontage. 
b.	Curb and gutter where required along all roadways. 
(3)	Street name signs, stop bars, striping and traffic control signs as approved by the County shall be paid for by the developer and installed by the Jackson County Road Department in accordance with Sec. 1011. 
(4)	Street lights in accordance with Sec. 1012. 
(5)	Driveway access to each lot, and project access improvements (deceleration, turn lanes, etc.) as deemed necessary by the County Engineer under the provisions of Sec. 1013. 
(6)	Sidewalks, if required under Sec. 1015. 
(7)	Storm water drainage and detention facilities in accordance with Sec. 1017. 
(8)	Public or private water supply as required under Sec. 1018. 
(9)	Public or private sanitary waste disposal as required under Sec. 1019. 
Sec. 1007. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-06, § 3b, adopted Apr. 19, 2010, repealed § 1007. Former § 1007 pertained to guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. This section bore no history note. 
Sec. 1008. - Survey Monuments. 
(a)	Exterior development boundaries. 
(1)	An iron pipe or ½-inch iron pin at least 18 inches long shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or development project being developed and shall be driven no less than 1 inch above the finished grade. 
(2)	Existing permanent monuments that, in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor, are of sufficiently durable construction shall be marked and maintained. 
(b)	Lot and street corners. 
(1)	All other street or lot corners shall be marked with an iron pipe or ½-inch iron pin at least 18 inches long and driven no less than 1 inch above the finished grade. 
(2)	All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval. 
(c)	Floodplain Elevations. On developments containing floodplains, flood elevation references shall be set. 
Sec. 1009. - Easements. 
Easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)	Utility easements. 
(1)	Utility easements for private utilities shall be avoided except in cases where no other satisfactory arrangements can be provided for the installation of private utilities. 
(2)	Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the County (or other appropriate public entity) for such purpose. 
(3)	Easements for water and sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, and may be required to be wider depending on the depth of cut to maintain a 1:1 open cut slope. When warranted, temporary construction easements widths shall be as required by the county. Easements for sanitary sewers may be required by the Public Development Department for future extension of lines, whether or not the subdivision or development is currently proposed to be served by public sewer. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Pedestrian Easements. Pedestrian easements not less than 10 feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
(c)	Drainage and access easements. 
(1)	Drainage easements shall be cleared and opened for a closed storm water or drainage system of adequate width and capacity at the time of development to control surface water run-off. Run-off slopes and side slopes shall be specified by the developer's engineer according to good engineering practices. 
(2)	A publicly dedicated drainage easement is to be provided along any manmade drainage channel or drainage pipe located outside a street right-of-way. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of 10 feet wide. 
(3)	Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drainage improvements without the prior written approval from the county. 
(d)	Conservations easements. Conservation easements, as may be required by this Development Code shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and must conform to the requirements set out for such easements in the Environmental Protection Article of this Code. 
(e)	Overlapping easements. Easements for water, sanitary sewers and drainage purposes may be combined, but must be a minimum of 30 feet if in combination. Any easement containing more than one pipe must provide at least 10 feet beyond the pipe and the pipes must be at least 10 feet apart (measured on center). Wider easements shall be required when necessary to maintain a 1:1 open cut slope to each pipe. 
(f)	Access Easements. Access easements shall be provided to allow connectivity where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities; shall pertain to residential, commercial, industrial, and multifamily developments. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1010. - Streets. 
(a)	Access. 
(1)	A publicly approved street meeting the requirements of this Article shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision. Private streets, if allowed by the County, must meet all public street standards. 
(2)	Every development and every major subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a standard County road. 
(3)	A building permit shall not be issued unless continuous paved road access between the property and the public street system is provided by a publicly dedicated street or an approved private street. See Section 1010(g), substandard street. A building permit shall not be issued on any property that does not front on or have approved access to a publicly dedicated street or an approved private street, in accordance with the minimum lot frontage and access easement provisions of this Development Code. 
(4)	When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(5)	No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(6)	Reserve strips which control access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall be prohibited unless their control is placed in the hands of the County under ownership, dedication, or easement conditions approved by the County Attorney and the Director of Public Development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(7)	Subdivision streets that intersect a State or U.S. numbered highway, a County arterial or county collector road shall do so at intervals of not less than 500 feet, or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. On all other roads, at least 250 feet must separate street intersections on the same side of the road, measured centerline to centerline. Compliance with sight distance requirements of this Development Code may require greater distances between street intersections. 
(b)	Street classification. Streets are classified according to the function that they serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads are as follows, and as may be shown on the latest adopted or amended Jackson County Transportation Plan; properties located within an overlay district must follow the classifications as listed in Article 5 of this code. 
(1)	Principal Arterials. These roads, which include interstates and rural freeways: serve "substantial" statewide or interstate trips, as defined by high mileage or volume; connect most urban areas of 25,000 or more and virtually all urban areas of 50,000 or more; and provide an integrated network without stub connections except where geography dictates otherwise. 
(2)	Minor Arterials. With the principal arterial system, these roads form a rural network that links other cities, larger towns, and other traffic generators, such as major resort areas, capable of attracting travel over long distances; links all developed areas of the state; and serve corridors with trip lengths and travel density greater than those predominantly served by rural collector or local systems. Minor arterials therefore constitute routes whose design should be expected to provide for relatively high overall travel speeds, with minimum interference to through-movement. 
(3)	Major Collectors. These roads, with minor collectors, primarily serve the county rather than state traffic. Consequently, more moderate speeds are typical. They serve any county seat or larger town not on an arterial route, and other traffic generators of equivalent intra county importance, such as consolidated schools, shipping points, county parks, and important mining and agricultural areas; link the latter places with nearby larger towns or cities, or arterials and freeways; and serve the more important intra county travel corridors. 
(4)	Minor Collectors. Serving county-wide traffic, these roads should evenly collect traffic from local roads and bring all developed areas within a reasonable distance of a collector road; provide service to the remaining smaller communities; and link the locally important traffic generators with the hinterland. 
(5)	Local Roads. These roads serve primarily to provide access to adjacent land and serve low-mileage trips as compared to collectors or other higher systems. Local roads constitute the rural mileage not classified as part of the principle arterial, minor arterial, or collector systems. 
(c)	Relation to present and future street system. 
(1)	The street pattern within a development or subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern or anticipated development, if any, at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. Topography, natural features such as streams and tree growth shall be considered. 
(2)	Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for the street. If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
(3)	If the county desires the roadway to be improved to a standard greater than that for a local residential rural roadway, Jackson County shall provide or pay the cost of the additional materials and labor. 
(4)	All right-of-way required for off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to Jackson County. If the Developer is unable to acquire the right-of-way, the Jackson county attorney shall initiate acquisition proceedings, at the expense of the developer, after authorization by the Jackson County Board of Commissioners. 
(5)	Where, in the opinion of the Public Development Director, it is necessary to provide for inter-parcel access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property and existing streets through the development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(6)	Subdivisions shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic on local streets. However, the provision for the extension and continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining areas is required. 
(7)	Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Public Development Department shall require marginal access streets, single tier lots, or such other treatment as will provided protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with the arterial street, and separation of local and through traffic. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(8)	Where no street exists or where the adjoining property is in alignment with a proposed street, a temporary turnaround shall be provided at the boundary of the property. 
(d)	Design standards for streets. 
(1)	Arterial Streets. All State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. All County arterials that are not State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of this Development Code. 
(2)	Local and Collector Streets. All local and collector streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this Development Code, except that all State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Jackson County approved traffic calming devices shall be installed in all residential and commercial developments. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	Minimum width of right-of-way. Minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown on Table 10.1. Additional right-of-way may be required to accommodate turn lanes, deceleration lanes or other road improvements. 
TABLE 10.1. MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 

 
*Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
(4)	Additional Right-of-Way. 
a.	Subdivisions which include an existing street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this Ordinance shall provide additional width along one or both sides of such street or road so that the minimum right-of-way required by this Article is established if lots front on the existing street. Subdivisions abutting only one side of such a street or road shall provide a minimum of one-half of the right-of-way required by these regulations measured from the center of the existing right-of-way. 
b.	When a future street or road, as proposed in the Comprehensive Plan and/or Transportation Plan as approved by the BOC, adjoins or traverses the subdivision or development project, the future right-of-way shall be platted as part of the subdivision or development project. No development will be allowed within the platted future right-of-way except for drives and landscaping, and the platted future right-of-way is to be treated as a lot line for the provision of all setback lines as required by this Article. The developer will be contractually bound to the County to sell this strip of land to the County at a future date, for the amount stated in the tax digest. A right-of-way agreement shall be executed before the Public Development Director approves the development. 
c.	On local residential streets with a 50 foot of right-of-way an additional 10 feet for a permanent utility maintenance easement shall be established adjacent to the right-of-way, as either a single 10 foot strip or as two 5 foot strips across the front of the adjacent lots. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(5)	Vertical alignment of streets. 
a.	All streets shall have a minimum grade of 0.5 percent. Minimum grade on cul-de-sacs shall be 1%. 
b.	Minimum design speeds and maximum grades for proposed streets by street classification shall be as shown in the Unified Development Standard Details. Design exceptions must be justified and approved by the Public Development Director. 
c.	Minimum length of vertical curves shall be as specified in the Jackson County Unified Development Standard Design Details [Amended 2-13-2006] 
[Table 10.2 Street Grades and Design Speed deleted 2-13-2006] 
(6)	Horizontal alignment of streets. 
a.	Where a deflection angle of more than 5 degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as shown on Table 10.3. 
TABLE 10.3. HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT 

 
**Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
b.	Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections as measured from the centerline of cross streets. A tangent of a least 200 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on collector streets, and 100 feet on local streets. 
c.	Street jogs shall have a centerline offset of no less than 125 feet. 
d.	Intersections. All streets shall intersect at no less than 60 degrees, and as near a right angle as possible. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. Such intersecting streets shall provide an uninterrupted line of sight from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum sight distance required in accordance with this Development Code. 
e.	Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited. 
f.	Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the County Engineer. In no case shall anything extend more than 3 feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
g.	Curb lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 20 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. 
h.	Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall parallel the back of curb of the roadway, and shall be mitered 20 feet along both streets from the point of the right-of-way lines projected to their intersection. 
(7)	Minimum sight distance. 
a.	Sight distance requirements at intersections and driveways shall be as shown in the Unified Development Standard Details. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
[Table 10.4 Minimum Sight Distance, deleted 2-13-2006] 
b.	The design speed for sight distance requirements at entrance intersections shall be the existing posted speed limit. 
c.	Distances shall be measured from a point on the centerline of the entering road or driveway 10 feet back from the edge of the nearest trafficway in the abutting street, and extending in both directions along the abutting street. The sight distance shall be clear along its entire minimum length and unimpaired by intervening changes in street grade, horizontal alignment or obstructions. Examples of obstructions are vegetation, ground cover, signs, existing topography, etc. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(8)	Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs). 
a.	Cul-de-sac length. 
1.	A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 500 feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the Public Development Director. If these conditions exist, the maximum length shall be 1,500 feet unless a greater length is approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
2.	A cul-de-sac street shall have a length of no less than 125 feet. 
3.	The length of a cul-de-sac shall be the distance along the centerline of the cul-de-sac street measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center point of the turnaround radius. 
b.	Turnaround dimensions. 
1.	Cul-de-sacs in residential subdivisions shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter, and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of 80 feet. 
2.	Cul-de-sacs in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 120 feet in diameter, and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of 100 feet. 
c.	A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall not be allowed except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that will be extended in a later stage of construction. Such a temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turn-around having a roadway radius of 40 feet if: 
1.	One or more lots front exclusively on the street; and, 
2.	Extension of the street is not under construction when the Final Plat is submitted for recording. 
3.	Temporary turnarounds shall consist of 3 inches of graded aggregate base and 1 inch of asphalt. 
(9)	Alleys and service drives. 
a.	Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial or industrial developments. 
b.	Alleys in residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the alleys are intended to provide rear-access to garages on each lot. 
c.	When allowed, dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around having a radius of at least 40 feet, a "T-head" turn-around, or other solution acceptable to the Public Development Director and the Roads Superintendent. 
(10)	Half streets prohibited. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(11)	Split Level Streets and One-way Streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least 20 feet on each level and a slope between the two traffic ways of not less than three to one. One-way streets and split streets will be allowed when: 
a.	Topographic conditions are such that alternatives to the typical street construction would be more desirable. 
b.	The shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, special approval must be obtained from the Public Development Director for the specific design. 
(e)	Street Improvements. Roadways shall be constructed and paved with top courses meeting the following standards: 
(1)	Minimum width of pavement. 
a.	The minimum pavement width, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement, shall be as required for the street type in the Unified Development Standard Details. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Street base. 
a.	Graded aggregate base course. The base course shall consist of mineral aggregate and may be a combination of natural deposit or a blend of the materials specified. All materials are subject to approval by the County Engineer. If a blend of materials is used, it shall be blended through a base plant that meets the latest specifications of the Georgia State Highway Department Specification 815. 
b.	Street base material shall conform to the thickness as required for the street type on in the Unified Development Standard Details. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
c.	For streets without curbs, the base shall extend at least 1 foot beyond the edge of payment. 
d.	Wherever unsuitable material is found in the subgrade, the unsuitable material shall be replaced with graded aggregate stone. 
(3)	Pavement topping. 
a.	Prime. After the base has been placed, mixed, compacted, shaped, inspected and accepted, it shall be primed with suitable asphaltic materials as specified in Department of Transportation Specification 412. 
b.	Roadway binder. After the prime has been inspected and accepted, the roadway or street shall be surfaced with Type "B" binder as required for the street type in the Unified Development Standard Details. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
[Table 10.5 Street Base and Pavement deleted 2-13-2006] 
c.	Tack coat shall be applied on a prepared road surface according to the requirements of Georgia Department of Transportation Specification 413. 
d.	Final topping shall consist of a course of Type "E" asphaltic cement as required for the street type in the Unified Development Standard Details. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
e.	If two-stage paving for residential streets is approved by the County Engineer, the developer shall place the binder course on the street but may delay final paving. Prior to the expiration of the performance period, the binder surface will be primed with suitable asphaltic materials [0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard] the same day it is compacted, and cured for 7 days prior to paving as specified in Department of Transportation Specification 412. After the prime has been inspected and accepted, the roadway or street shall be surfaced with a minimum 1½ inches of Type "E" asphaltic concrete wearing surface. No surface treatment pavement as a finished wear surface will be accepted. All asphaltic concrete will be mixed in an asphalt plant meeting the latest requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(4)	Curb and gutter. 
a.	Curb and gutter are required along: 
1.	All new commercial and industrial streets. 
2.	All new residential subdivision streets except for those subdivisions meeting the following criteria: 
a)	Fewer than 24 lots will be located in the subdivision on the new streets; or 
b)	The average size of all lots in the subdivision is greater than 1 acre and the average lot width is greater than 150 feet. 
3.	Existing County streets and roads that abut a subdivision where curb and gutter are required, or abut a multi-family or nonresidential development. 
4.	New construction on existing County streets and roads, including deceleration lanes and travel lane widening. 
b.	Local residential street curbs shall be Portland cement concrete, 6-inch x 24-inch x 12-inch vertical type, with a minimum strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days, excluding graded aggregate base underneath the curb as shown in the standard details. Roll back curb will be permitted in residential developments with fewer than 99 lots, either phased or in single development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
c.	Curbs along collectors and local commercial or industrial street curbs shall be Portland cement concrete, 8-inch x 30-inch x 12-inch vertical type only, with a minimum strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. [Amended 2-13-2006] 

Note— Graded aggregate base is not required beneath curb and gutter interior to residential development. 
d.	Curbing along streets shall meet the following standards: 
1.	Developer's engineer or surveyor shall set line and grade. 
2.	One-half inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
3.	The County Engineer shall individually approve special curbing design (center islands, etc.). 
4.	Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
5.	Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
6.	All curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
7.	Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The curb and gutter shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. There shall be no areas of ponding. 
8.	After installation, drainage under the curb to side slopes is required, using minimum 4 inch diameter pipe sections. 
e.	A valley gutter may be used across a driveway only at its intersection with a street. 
(5)	Slopes and Shoulder Improvements. 
a.	On streets with curb and gutter, the shoulders shall slope ¼ inch to the foot toward the roadway for at least 7 feet from back of curb, and no more than ½ inch to the foot for the remainder of the right-of way width. 
b.	On streets with swale ditch drainage, the shoulders shall slope ¾ inch to the foot away from the roadway for at least 5 feet to the drainage channel. The maximum slope for the drainage channel shall be 2 feet of run for each 1 one foot of fall, with a minimum 2-foot wide channel at the bottom of the swale. 
(f)	Private streets. 
(1)	Private streets, if approved by the Board of Commissioners through a Special Use application, shall meet all requirements and standards that apply to public streets. 
(2)	The private street shall be located within an access easement no less wide than that required for right-of-way for a similar public street. 
(3)	Apartment and condominium streets and associated storm drainage shall be constructed to the residential public street standards of this Code. 
(4)	Owner's release. At the time of purchasing property that is served by a private street, upon any sale or resale of a property, the purchaser shall acknowledge by execution of a release that the street is private and not maintained by the County, and that maintenance of the street is the responsibility of the owner or other private association or entity identified in the release. The release is to be prepared using a form acceptable to the County Attorney and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(5)	Other standards. 
a.	A private street subdivision shall meet all other requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions, such as storm water runoff and detention requirements, the provision of utilities, and traffic and street name signs. 
b.	Private streets shall be denoted as such on the street name signs for each such street. Proposed streets, which are extensions of, or in alignment with, existing or other proposed streets shall have the same name. Street names shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. The County may require a different color than the standard color for the street name sign, or may require that an additional sign be affixed to the street name sign pole indicating that the street is not maintained by the County. 
c.	Any gate placed across a private street that limits access to a subdivision or development shall provide for unimpeded access by emergency vehicles, governmental vehicles on official business, and delivery services including the U.S. Postal Service. Accessibility to such gated communities shall comply with all Standards and requirements of the County for access activation, and shall be of breakaway construction. 
(g)	Substandard streets. In the event that a development has access to a substandard road (i.e., a dirt, gravel or surface treated pavement road), the following project access improvements shall be required: 
(1)	The street shall be upgraded by the developer to a standard County road from the project entrance to the nearest standard paved road along the route of access. 
(2)	The roadway section shall meet the requirements of a residential collector street or a local commercial/industrial street, as appropriate to the proposed development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	The developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements. 
(4)	The right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to the County. If the developer cannot acquire adequate right-of-way, the County Attorney shall initiate acquisition proceedings at the expense of the developer after authorization by the Board of Commissioners. 
[Paragraph 5 deleted 2-13-2006] 
(h)	Substandard streets. In the event that a county maintained roadway is being maintained by the County but right-of-way does not exist other than prescriptive right-of-way the following shall apply: 
(1)	The roadways qualifying under this Section are: 
a.	Stapler Cemetery (for a length of 1,300 feet and a width of 12 feet). 
b.	Joe Bolton (for a length of 1,400 feet and a width of 18 feet). 
c.	Unity Church Circle (for a length of 500 feet and a width of 23 feet). 
d.	Diamond Hill Church Road (for a length of 650 feet and a width of 18 feet). 
e.	Wilson Garage Road (for a length of 685 feet and a width of 18 feet). 
f.	Hoods Academy (for a length of 1,000 feet and a width of 18 feet). 
g.	Lake Yamacutah (for a length of 900 feet and a width of 12 feet). 
h.	Elrod Road (for a length of 1,250 feet and a width of 20 feet). 
i.	Moons Bridge Road (for a length of 250 feet and a width of 18 feet). 
(2)	If a roadway is not listed in Section 1010(h)(1); an application for consideration can be made with the Jackson County Roads Department and shall be evaluated for approval by the following requirements: 
a.	Roadway must be have been maintained by Jackson County Roads Department prior to the existing code created in 2003. 
b.	Right-of-way currently does not exist on the roadway. 
c.	If approved by the Jackson County Roads Department the Public Development Department to propose a text amendment for approval by the Board of Commissioners. If approved by the Board of Commissioners then the roadway will be added for consideration under this section of the code. 
(3)	If the County determines it is in its best interest to upgrade the surface of the road (as listed by length and width) then the following requirements must be met prior to any work commencing: 
a.	Right-of-way for the entire length and width of the portion of road to be improved must be donated and deeded by the current owner. The deed must be reviewed and approved by the County Attorney and recorded prior to any maintenance occurring. 
b.	Only the roads including the length and width listed shall be considered for upgrade. 
c.	At the time of inspection the Roads Superintendent will make a determination if an additional 6 feet on each side of the road will be required to make required upgrades to the ditches. If an additional 6 feet on each side of the roadway will be required to work on the ditches then the additional feet will be required to be deeded to the County as specified in this section prior to any work commencing. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 3c—j, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1011. - Street signs, traffic signs and striping. 
(a)	Street name signs. 
(1)	Street name signs of a type approved by the County are to be placed at all intersections. 
(2)	Street markers shall be installed by the County at the developer's expense (or a homeowners association in the event an alternate signpost is chosen at a later date). 
(b)	Traffic Signs. 
(1)	Traffic control signs shall conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
(2)	The County shall install these traffic control signs through payment of fees by the developer. 
(3)	Stop signs shall be located from the sign's edge 6 feet off the back of curb or edge of pavement at the beginning of the intersection radius. The sign shall be located on the right side of the intersection. The bottom of the sign shall be at least 5 feet above the edge of pavement or back-of-curb. This standard applies to typical residential interior street intersections. 
(4)	All other intersections shall have stop signs located according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The County shall install these at the developer's expense. 
(5)	Stop signs shall be sized by the County Road Superintendent. 
(6)	All other signs shall be sized according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)	Striping Requirements. 
(1)	All newly constructed streets having 4 or more lanes (including auxiliary lanes) and existing streets being widened with one or more additional lanes shall be striped or the payment of said striping costs shall be required from the developer by Jackson County prior to the approval of development conformance for the project. 
(2)	Striping shall be accomplished with paint meeting Georgia DOT standards conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1012. - Street Lights. 
The installation of all street lighting fixtures within County right-of-way must be approved by the Public Development Department and shall be subject to such conditions as required by Public Development prior to such installation. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 3k, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1013. - Driveway and Development entrances. 
All proposed subdivisions, subdivision lots and other land developments shall be provided with driveways or development entrances meeting the following requirements: 
(a)	Driveway access to a State road. Access onto a State road shall meet existing Georgia Department of Transportation requirements. A copy of the Georgia Department of Transportation permit shall be submitted to the County Engineer before the plans can be approved. 
(b)	Driveway access to major County roads. 
(1)	Residential lots in any major subdivision shall have no direct driveway access to a County major collector or arterial road unless approved by the Board of Commissioners, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway unless approved by the Georgia DOT, and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by Jackson County. 
(2)	Reverse frontage lots may be utilized but are not required in major residential subdivisions where direct access to a County road, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway, is not allowed. 
(3)	An easement of at least 25 feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting any road external to the subdivision. The backs of the adjacent houses must be screened from view as follows [Amended 2-13-2006]: 
a.	The easement may retain its natural vegetation if existing trees and understory shrubs will adequately screen the view of the backs of the adjacent houses. 
b.	Supplemental vegetation may be added within the easement to provide adequate screening. 
c.	The easement may be improved with a landscaped earthen berm of no less than 4 feet in height. 
(c)	Driveway standards; in general. Each driveway shall be constructed in a manner that will not damage the adjacent roadway or hinder use of the adjacent roadway. 
(1)	Driveways shall not intersect adjacent roads at an interior angle less than 60 degrees; 
(2)	All waters from driveways must enter onto the shoulders of adjacent roads and into the ditch or gutter. No water shall enter onto the adjacent road surface or pavement; 
(3)	Any driveway entering on a roadway or street shall be sloped down from the street or roadway at a rate of ½ inch per 1 foot for a minimum of 10 feet; 
(4)	At the ditch line, the driveway must be lower in elevation than the adjacent roadbed; 
(5)	The finished driveway surface within the right-of-way where it abuts the adjacent road must be no higher in elevation than the roadbed; 
(6)	As far as practical, all driveways must be located and constructed so as to maximize sight distance by those traversing the driveway or the adjacent road; 
(7)	In and around the first 50 feet of all driveway culverts, the slope of the land shall be at a grade of no more than 3 to 1 so as to enable to County to better maintain the culvert area; and 
(8)	All driveway culvert pipes shall comply with the materials and installation requirements of this Article. 
(9)	On subdivided lots which access an existing County road, the driveway shall be placed as far as possible from existing road intersections to maximize sight distance. 
(10)	All residential or commercial drives shall be permitted through the Public Development Department. Commercial drives shall proceed through the development review process. Residential drives shall be reviewed, approved, and permitted by the Public Development Director, or designee, prior to construction. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Access Easements. Vehicular access easements may be provided from a public street via easement in any one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)	The property existed in whole as a legal lot of record prior to the adoption of this Development Code, but does not meet the minimum frontage requirement for the applicable zoning district. The property must be served by an exclusive access easement which shall be limited to the provision of access to only one principal use or structure on one lot. 
(2)	The access easement serves one single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with one other single-family residence, both of which meet the minimum size, frontage, lot width and other requirements of this Code. 
(3)	The access easement was lawfully established as such prior to the adoption of this Development Code. 
(4)	The access easement coincides with a private roadway approved under codes, ordinances, or regulations of Jackson County prior to the adoption of this Development Code. The ownership and maintenance responsibility by private party(s) must be clearly established on the final plat of the development. 
(5)	The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage requirements of this Development Code, but from which access cannot be achieved. 
(e)	Residential subdivision entrances. 
(1)	Access improvements such as deceleration lanes, dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, signalization, etc., required as deemed necessary for safe traffic operations by the County Engineer shall be installed at all entrance roads into a residential subdivision. See Sec. 1014, below. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	A single entrance road to a subdivision shall serve no more than 200 lots. Where the property configuration prohibits or makes impractical the installation of more than one entrance, the County Engineer may waive this requirement following sound engineering practice. When more than one entrance is required, the first additional entrance shall be provided to serve up to an additional 100 lots, and each additional entrance thereafter shall be provided for each additional 250 lots. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	A residential major subdivision with fewer than 24 lots whose entrance is on an existing collector or arterial road, and any major residential subdivision whose entrance is on an existing minor collector road, shall install offset radii and 50 foot tapers. 
(f)	Commercial/industrial subdivision entrances. Access improvements such as deceleration lanes, dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, signalization, etc., required as deemed necessary for safe traffic operations by the County Engineer shall be installed at all entrance roads into a commercial/industrial subdivision. See Sec. 1014, below. 
(g)	Driveways for multi-family and nonresidential developments. 
(1)	Access improvements such as deceleration lanes, dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, signalization, etc., required as deemed necessary for safe traffic operations by the County Engineer shall be installed at all entrance roads into a multi-family or nonresidential development. See Sec. 1014, below. 
(2)	If a driveway entrance on a major collector or arterial street is less than 200 feet from an intersection, a continuous travel lane shall be constructed from the intersecting street to the driveway, and an acceleration lane shall be constructed beyond the driveway. Acceleration lanes shall extend for 150 feet, with an additional 50 foot taper length, and have a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter). Additional right-of-way to accommodate the acceleration lane and a 10 foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to Jackson County. 
(3)	Service stations and other commercial businesses on corner lots that have frontage on interior subdivision streets shall have access only from the main street. 
(4)	Commercial businesses on corner lots that have frontage on a local or minor collector side street shall install an additional lane out to the intersection if driveway access from said side street is provided. 
(h)	Maintenance of sight distances. The developer shall be required to upgrade the existing County road to meet the sight distance requirements of this Article. In cases involving rock cuts, deep fills or cuts, proximity to floodplain, etc., the requirements of pavement widening for full deceleration lanes may be modified or waived by the County Engineer following accepted engineering practice. 
Sec. 1014. - Deceleration lanes and turn lanes. 
(a)	Deceleration lanes; where required. A deceleration lane shall be required at each entrance to a residential subdivision of 24 lots or more, commercial or industrial subdivision, multifamily development or nonresidential development at its point of access with a collector or arterial street. 
(b)	Median breaks. If the street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer desires to construct a median break to serve the development, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be provided by the developer meeting the design standards of Jackson County. 
(c)	Deceleration and turn lane constructions standards. 
(1)	Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane or turn lane and a 10-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to Jackson County. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Curb and gutter along all deceleration lanes and tapers are required, and shall be constructed in accordance with 1010(e)(4). 
(3)	Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration or turn lane shall also be required. 
(4)	Other project access improvements may be required by the County Engineer in addition to or in lieu of a required deceleration lane in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public, based on a traffic study prepared by a professional engineer. 
(5)	The developer will pay the cost of any catch basins that must be constructed along an existing County road as a result of the deceleration lane. 
(6)	Utilities and drain pipes shall be relocated at the developer's expense outside of the deceleration lane. Waterlines can remain beneath the additional lanes. 
Sec. 1015. - Sidewalks. 
(a)	Sidewalks; where required. Sidewalks are required along all of the following streets: 
(1)	All new commercial and industrial streets. 
(2)	All new residential subdivision streets except for those subdivisions meeting the following criteria: 
a.	Less than 24 lots will be located in the subdivision, to include all phases; or 
b.	All lots in the subdivision is greater than one acre and the lot width is greater than 150 feet at the building line. 
(3)	Existing County streets and roads that abut a subdivision where sidewalks are required, or abut a multi-family or nonresidential development. 
(4)	Sidewalks are not required along any street that does not have curb and gutter. 
(b)	Sidewalks; where located. 
(1)	Sidewalks shall be located not less than 2 feet from the back of curb, and not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
(2)	Sidewalks, when required, shall be located on both sides of streets within a subdivision, and along the side of any street that abuts a subdivision or development project. 
(3)	Sidewalks, when located along or adjacent to common areas, open space, or other areas not intended for sale or areas not to be utilized as a building site/lot must be constructed prior to final plat approval. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(c)	Sidewalks; construction. All sidewalks constructed within the county right-of-way must be built according to the following standards: 
(1)	Sidewalks must comply with all requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide and 4 inches thick. 
(3)	Concrete shall be 3,000 psi at 28 days' strength. 
(4)	Sidewalks shall be backfilled and landscaped. 
(d)	Sidewalks; construction timeframe. Single Family Residential Developments When sidewalks are required to be constructed within a single family residential development they must be completed in accordance with the following: 
(1)	Sidewalks shall be constructed concurrently and shall be poured in conjunction with the development of each lot and are poured in conjunction with the pouring of the driveways. Prior to final plat all sidewalks required along common areas, open space, or other areas not intended for sale or areas not to be utilized as a building site/lot must be constructed. 
(2)	Sidewalks constructed on a lot-by-lot basis shall be inspected by the Building Department in concurrence with other required building inspections. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until a properly constructed sidewalk is in place on the lot. 
(3)	The following statement shall be noted on the final plat: 
"This development will utilize a sidewalk system throughout the project as shown and approved on the preliminary plat/development plans pertaining to this development. The sidewalks will be installed on a lot-by-lot basis. Therefore, property owners of parcels shown on this plat are required to construct sidewalks along the road frontage of their property. Said sidewalks must comply with the requirements of the Jackson County Unified Development Code." 
(e)	Sidewalks; construction timeframe. Multi-Family and Nonresidential Developments. [Added 2-13-2006] 
(1)	When required to be installed as part of a multi-family or nonresidential development project under the Project Design Standards Article of this Code, sidewalks shall be installed by the developer in pace with construction of buildings or development phases, with all sidewalks to be installed prior to issuance of the final certificate of site development plan compliance. 
(2)	Sidewalks constructed as part of a multi-family or nonresidential project will need to be inspected by the Department of Public Development in concurrence with other required building/site inspections. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 3l, m, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1016. - Location of utilities and street cuts. 
All utility work, encroachments, pavement cuts and associated road or lane closures must be reviewed, approved and permitted by the Public Development Department. 
(a)	Location of utilities in streets. 
(1)	Aboveground utilities. Street light poles, junction boxes, transformers and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must be at least 8 feet back from the back of the street curb (or edge of pavement) and 1 foot back from the edge of any sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
(2)	Underground utilities. 
a.	All electric, telephone, cable TV and other wires shall be placed underground in any major subdivision, and in any multi-family or nonresidential development. 
b.	Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way as shown on the Standard Details. 
c.	The right-of-way is to be cleared and rough graded the full width prior to any utility installation. 
d.	Cable and pipe shall be 3 foot below finished grade minimum. 
e.	Any disturbance or construction in the completed (seeded and/or sodded) right-of-way by a public utility such as power, water, sewer, gas, phone and cable must be repaired and/or replaced with the specified materials as called for in the initial improvements. 
f.	All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
g.	All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
h.	All private utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
(3)	Underground utility location with open ditch. Maximum drainage swale slopes (front and back) are 5:1 and a minimum of 3:1 with the invert of the swale no less than 24" from the finished elevation of the street. 
(4)	Underground utility location with curb and gutter. Cross drains are to be carried to the toe of construction slope. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 3n, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1017. - Storm drainage. 
(a)	Applicability and exemptions. 
(1)	An adequate drainage system, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
(2)	All persons proposing development or construction in the county shall prepare a stormwater management plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been reviewed and approved by the Public Development Department, except as exempted below. 
(3)	Exemptions from Storm Drainage Requirements. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
a.	Agricultural land management. 
b.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached dwellings. 
c.	Residential development consisting of single-family houses, on a lot of two acres or greater which is not part of a larger residential development otherwise subject to a NOI. 
(b)	Standards to be used in designing system. 
(1)	Storm detention facilities. All development plans will require a hydrology study certified by a registered engineer. If detention has been waived or provided in a previous section then a letter with supporting documents should be provided. Permanent detention facilities will be required, and shall be designed so that the following standards shall apply: 
a.	The excess runoff created by new development, which will be the difference between pre and post development runoff and include any runoff not compensated by use of Best Management Practices (BMP), must be stored in a detention pond. 
b.	The first one inch of runoff in critical areas and one-half inch in other areas shall be treated for water quality. 
c.	Stormwater detention facilities providing for the storage and controlled release of runoff shall be required for any development activity that will increase the peak rate of discharge by 1 cubic foot per second or more for the 10-year frequency storm. 
d.	All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the runoff volumes associated with storms having 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and safe overflow for 100-year storm. 
e.	The structure should be constructed such that trash and pollutants are prevented from exiting the pond. 
f.	Detention shall be provided such that the peak rate of flow from the site after development will not exceed the corresponding flow that would have been created by the 1-year, 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency storms prior to development. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
g.	The reservoir routing method or an equivalent method shall be used in sizing detention ponds. (The bowstring method is not acceptable.) 
h.	An emergency overflow device (which does not include the throttling device) for a detention pond shall be designed to pass the 100-year peak developed inflow without overtopping the dam. 
i.	Pond discharge locations shall be in defined drainage ditches. The developer's engineer shall include in the hydrology study a discussion of existing conditions downstream of the detention pond and an explanation of how downstream property owners will not be adversely affected by the "concentrated" runoff. If there is an existing storm drainage system within 150 feet of the discharge point of the outlet pipe for the pond, then the developer shall extend the outlet pipe and tie-in to the existing system. 
j.	The steepest fill slopes shall be 5:1. If conditions do not permit then 3:1 fill slopes will be allowed based on review by the County Engineer. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1; slopes proposed to be steeper must be approved by the County Engineer. 
k.	The top of the berm shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide when 3:1 slopes are used and 10 feet wide with 5:1 slopes. 
l.	Slopes shall be stable under all conditions including maintenance. 
m.	Full and living coverage of an approved permanent grass devoid of noxious weeds shall be provided. 
n.	The bottom of the pond shall be firm enough to be maintained by mechanical means. 
o.	A 10-foot wide access road that runs on top of the dam shall be required around the circumference of the pond, where topography does not prohibit this. 
p.	Where fences are required to be provided by the County Engineer, they shall be constructed between 3.5 and 6 feet high. 
1.	Commercial gauge chain link fence shall be screened with acceptable hedge material or a climbing vine such as Ivory or Confederate jasmine. 
2.	If it a wood fence is desired it shall be placed on the lots of the individual property owners and be noted as their maintenance responsibility (i.e., shown on the plats and deeds at dedication). 
q.	As part of the hydrological study, consideration shall be given to the flow capacity of downstream drainage structures. If the downstream system is inadequate, the developer is required to either improve the down stream drainage structure or provide additional storage in the detention facility. 
r.	In approved cases the detention may be provided by damming a natural basin with minimal clearing. The required discharge structure opening must be large enough to prevent stoppage from leaves and other debris naturally occurring. Also, the volume should be adequate to account for natural growth of vegetation. 
s.	Location of stormwater detention facilities. 
1.	In residential subdivisions, the detention facility must be located on a separate lot and be deeded to Jackson County, which shall be responsible for its maintenance and continuing operation. The lot need not meet minimum lot size requirements for the subdivision. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
2.	In nonresidential subdivisions, the detention facility may be located on a separate lot and owned by a property owners' association, which shall be responsible for its maintenance and continuing operation; or located on each lot within the subdivision and constructed when the lot is developed. 
3.	In multi-family and nonresidential development projects, separate detention facilities shall be provided for each development. The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintenance and continuing operation of the facility. 
4.	Stormwater detention facilities serving two or more developments may be approved by the County, provided that private ownership of the facilities and provisions for their perpetual maintenance and continuing operation are clearly established in a manner acceptable to the County Attorney. 
(2)	Storm Drains. 
a.	Sizing and location of all existing and proposed drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer, landscape architect, or registered land surveyor subject to approval by the County Engineer. 
b.	Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of 3 fps so that sediment will not collect. 
c.	State Highway Standard 1030D (or most current) shall be used in determining class (concrete) or gauge of pipe under fill, method of backfilling and pipe installation. 
d.	Drainage formula used in determining size of drainage structure shall be determined by the developer's engineer, landscape architect, or registered land surveyor according to accepted engineering practice, subject to approval of the County Engineer. 
e.	A registered engineer shall certify the storm drain pipe sizes. 
f.	The 25-year storm event shall be used in designing the storm drains. In cases where a spring, creek, or other watercourse traverses the property, the 100-year storm event will be used for design. 
g.	Storm sewer catch basins, drop inlets, manholes, and junction boxes shall be designed by the developer's engineer to State Highway Standards and subject to final approval by the County Engineer. Catch basins shall be located outside of intersection radii unless unusual circumstances cause undue hardship, in which case the County Engineer may waive this requirement. 
(3)	Street water runoff shall be designed using the 10-year storm event and maximum encroachment shall be no greater than 8 feet from the face of curb. Cul-de-sacs on downhill street grades shall require catch basin throat design and cul-de-sac grading detail. Sub drainage will be installed to control the surplus ground water by intercepting side hill seepage or by lowering or regulating the ground water level where such conditions exist. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(4)	A certification by the supplier of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
(5)	Bridges shall be designed for a 100-year storm event. 
(6)	Provide riprap at all downstream discharge points of storm drains. Riprap sizing shall be sized in accordance with the "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia". [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(7)	Exit velocities from storm drain pipe for the 50-year storm shall not exceed ten (10) fps without additional energy dissipaters (not including required riprap). 
(8)	If it is proposed to make a new or existing lake a part of a subdivision, or if the subdivision is located downstream from a water impoundment, the developer shall be required to submit a breach analysis and show the dam breach zone on the plans. 
(c)	Cross drain pipes. 
(1)	Not less than 18 inches in size when under the street. No storm drain pipe running parallel to the existing primary road shall be located beneath the proposed acceleration/deceleration lanes. The County Engineer may modify or waive this requirement if unusual circumstances exist such as topography. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	The inlet and outlet end of all storm drain pipes (including driveway pipe) shall have either flared-end sections or safety end sections that meet the standards of Georgia Department of Transportation. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	Extend 20 feet past the rear of the building for storm drains 36 inches or smaller. 
(4)	Extend 20 feet past the rear of the building for storm drains larger than 36 inches and size the drainage ditch on each end of the pipe to limit the runoff velocity to less than 5 fps or riprap the ditch. 
(5)	Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet for pipes less than 42 inches. 
(6)	Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of State Standard 1030D (or most current). 
(7)	Rectangular concrete Headwalls are only permitted interior to Residential subdivisions. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Stormwater Ditches. All man-made ditches between storm drain pipes and downstream of storm drain pipe shall be designed by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect. The ditch profile and cross-sections every 50 feet shall be shown on the plans. The plans shall show the velocity and flow at each cross-section. Stormwater velocity shall not exceed 5 fps unless the ditches are lined. 
(e)	Materials and installation. 
(1)	Table 10.6 sets out guidelines for the use of storm sewer pipes by pipe material and type of installation. 
(2)	Only reinforced concrete pipe shall be used within street rights-of-way for arterial roads, and major and minor collectors. Concrete pipe shall not be used on grades exceeding 10%. Metal pipe may be used within the rights-of-way of local streets and for driveway culverts. Metal pipe shall either be corrugated steel (AASHTO M-36) with aluminized Type II or bituminous coating, or corrugated aluminum alloy pipe (AASHTO M-196). 
(3)	Corrugated high density polyethylene pipe, smooth lined type "S," can only be used for residential driveway applications and shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter. 
(4)	Pipe installation shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for construction of roads and bridges. Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. The developer shall remove any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
TABLE 10.6. SELECTION GUIDELINES FOR STORM SEWER PIPING 

 
Note 1. Corrugated high density polyethylene pipe, smooth lined type "S", can only be used for residential driveway applications and must be manufactured and installed in strict compliance with Georgia DOT Standard 1030-P. HDPE applications shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter.  Note 2. Reinforced concrete box culverts are required under excessive flow and/or fill depth conditions. Approved pipe materials may be utilized in some instances, based on the County engineer's assessment of existing conditions and future maintenance requirements.  Note 3. The addition of a Type "A" full bituminous coating is required. (AASHTO M-190). 
(5)	Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with State Highway Standard 1030D (or most current). 
(6)	Backfilling of trenches shall be accomplished immediately after the pipe is laid. The fill around the pipe shall be placed in layers not to exceed 6 inches with each layer being thoroughly compacted. All material shall have an in place density of 98% modified proctor to a depth of 6 inches below the finished grade, and 95% modified proctor at depths greater than 6 inches below the finished grade. Compaction requirements shall be attained by the use of mechanical compaction methods. Each layer of backfill shall be placed loosely and thoroughly compacted in place. 
(7)	All backfill shall be nonplastic in nature, free from roots, vegetative matter, waste, construction material or other objectionable material. Said material shall be capable of being compacted by mechanical means and shall have no tendency to flow or behave in a plastic manner under the tamping blows. 
(8)	Material deemed by the Public Development Department as unsuitable for backfill purposes shall be removed and replaced with selected backfill material. 
(9)	Water shall not be permitted to rise in trenches that are not backfilled after the pipe has been placed. 
(f)	Minimum Clearances. Two feet between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert are required under the roadway. Pipes included in easements shall have a minimum cover of 1 foot or at the manufacturers' recommendations. A minimum of 6 inches between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
(g)	Driveway culverts. 
(1)	Where a wet weather drainage ditch exists between the proposed road and 20 feet into the lot, the design professional shall size the driveway culvert as if the driveway was at the lowest point on that lot. The construction plans shall show the minimum driveway pipe size required. 
(2)	Driveway culverts may be any of the types of pipe materials shown on Table 10.6 for longitudinal pipe installation. 
(3)	The inlet and outlet end of all driveway culverts shall have either flared-end sections or concrete headwalls that meet the standards of Georgia Department of Transportation 1120 or 1125. 
(4)	Driveway culverts not located within rights-of-way shall be installed with material meeting the SBCCI Standard Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 3o, p, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1018. - Public water system. 
(1)	Public water service shall be provided to every lot in every subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection if public water is available within 1,500 feet of the subdivision or development. Water mains shall be connected to the existing public water system and extended past each lot. All water system improvements shall meet the standards for public water service of the providing jurisdiction. A contractor approved by the applicable authority shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves, service laterals through the curb line, and fire hydrants at the developer's expense. Water flow shall supply a minimum of 550 gallons per minute at hydrants. 
(2)	The Board of Commissioners may waive or delay the requirement to connect to the public water system operated by the Jackson County Water Authority when in the best interests of Jackson County. 
(3)	Mains shall be at least 6 inches in diameter. 
(4)	If a public water system is not available nor under bid or contract to be available, the subdivider shall provide a water supply using a community water system or individual wells in conformity with the regulations of the County Health Department, these development regulations and all other applicable laws and regulations. If a community water system is created, it must be designed to provide a minimum fire flow of 550 gallons per minute, be approved by the Jackson County Water Authority, and, upon completion, be dedicated to and operated by the Authority at the expense of the property owners in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 3q, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1019. - Public sewerage system. 
(1)	Every lot in every subdivision and every development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage system if sanitary sewerage is available by gravity flow within 1,500 feet of the subdivision or development, and adequate treatment capacity exists. Sewer lines shall be connected to the sanitary sewerage system of the appropriate providing jurisdiction and extended past each lot in accordance with all requirements. Every element of the sanitary sewerage system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the providing jurisdiction. 
(2)	The Board of Commissioners may waive or delay the requirement to connect to public sanitary sewer operated by the Jackson County Water and Sewer Authority when in the best interests of Jackson County. 
(3)	Mains shall be a least eight inches in diameter. 
(4)	If a public sewerage system is not available nor under bid or contract to be available at time of final plat, shall each lot be provided with septic tanks or other on-site disposal systems in accordance with the regulations of the Jackson County Environmental Health Department, these development regulations and all other applicable laws and regulations. If a community septic system is created, it must be approved by the Jackson County Water and Sewer Authority (or other providing jurisdiction when applicable), and upon completion, be dedicated to and operated by the Water and Sewer Authority (or other jurisdiction when applicable) at the expense of the property owners in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 3r, 4-19-2010) 
ARTICLE 11. - LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 1101. - Purpose of Article 11. 
This Article contains the requirements that apply to carrying out the land development process, including site grading and land disturbance activities; addressing flood hazard areas; the installation of streets, drainage facilities and public utilities; and building construction. 
Sec. 1102. - Overview—Project construction. 
(a)	Development activity. 
(1)	Preconstruction activity. Following the issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site, areas required to be undisturbed, such as natural buffers or stream greenways, must be designated by survey stakes, flags, ribbon, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the Planning & Development Department prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities. 
(2)	Grading. 
a.	Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
b.	Required erosion and sedimentation control measures and storm water drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved plans as development progresses. 
(b)	Development phase inspections. Requests for inspections shall be made by the owner or contractor to the Public Development Department at least 24 hours prior to when the inspection is needed. Inspections shall be made and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. Inspections are required of each of the following phases, as applicable to the actual work to be performed under the development permit [Amended 2-13-2006]: 
(1)	Prior to clearing or clearing and grubbing of the property or any portion included under the development permit, inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures and protective devices for undisturbed areas. Inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures will be conducted on a continuing basis by Planning & Development. 
(2)	Upon completion of street grading, inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with subgrade preparation. 
(3)	Upon installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other storm water facilities, inspection and approval shall be required prior to continuation with subgrade preparation. 
(4)	Street curbing and gutter (if provided). Inspection shall be requested after the subgrade is compacted and forms or string line have been set. Street width and vertical and horizontal alignment may be spot checked. 
(5)	Sub-grade of streets. After compaction, the sub-grade may be roll tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the Public Development Inspector. If deemed necessary by the inspector, additional tests in accordance with Section 1107(f) will be required. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(6)	Street base. The base shall be string-lined for depth and crown. The street base shall be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the Transportation & Public Works Director. If deemed necessary by the inspector, additional tests in accordance with Section 1107(f) will be required. 
(7)	Paving. A Public Development Inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored and the street will be cored after completion to check thickness and density. Satisfactory test results of the cores shall be delivered to Transportation & Public Works Department prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(c)	As-built surveys. 
(1)	Upon completion of the development activity as authorized by the development permit and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the owner shall submit to the Public Development Department a complete set of record drawings showing "as-built" conditions prepared by a registered land surveyor. These record drawings shall highlight any field change to the location, vertical and horizontal alignment, and finished elevations of [Amended 2/13/06]: 
a.	Drainage system pipes and channels. 
b.	Storm water detention facilities. 
c.	Sanitary sewer system or septic system. 
d.	Water system. 
e.	Streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
f.	Parking facility. 
g.	All buildings and structures. 
h.	Fences. 
i.	Landscaping. 
j.	Other items as deemed necessary by the reviewing departments. 
(2)	The As-Built Surveys shall be certified and sealed by the registered land surveyor, subject to the tolerances of accuracy indicated in the survey certification. 
(d)	Final development inspection. 
(1)	Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the Public Development Department shall conduct a final development inspection of the residential or non-residential development. 
(2)	The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or approval of a Certificate of Conformance. 
(3)	For non-residential developments a Certificate of Conformance must be obtained from Public Development prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy and business license. 
(e)	Maintenance surety. 
(1)	Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a Certificate of Conformance, a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the County Attorney is required for all public improvements to be maintained as shown on the as-built surveys until certificate of occupancy is received on 75% of the buildable lots (for residential) or two years (for non-residential or residential) whichever is greater. 
(2)	For multi-family and nonresidential development, the owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for two years from the date of issuance of the first certificate of occupancy or until at least 75% of the development has been completed, whichever occurs last. 
(3)	For subdivisions and for maintenance procedures in general for all development, see the Acceptance of Public Improvements section of the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code. 
(4)	The amount of the maintenance bond shall be calculated by the following formula: 
a.	$15.00 per linear foot of street, with a minimum of $20,000.00, 
b.	50% of the bond amount shall be in the form of a cash escrow, and 
c.	See Section 1213(b)(2)(j) for non-residential fees. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 4a—c, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1103. - Site clearing and grading. 
(a)	Development permit required. 
(1)	Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved development permit. See the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code for details. 
(2)	Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
(b)	Erosion and sedimentation control measures. Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
(c)	Stormwater drainage facilities. Required stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan as development progresses. 
(d)	Clearing and grubbing. The entire area within the typical grading section shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. 
(e)	Earthen embankments. Earthen embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of 6 inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. If necessary in order to obtain this compaction, the contractor shall add moisture to the material as it is placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 90 percent. Floodproofing shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
(f)	Slopes. 
(1)	The maximum slope for all cut or fill slopes shall be as shown on Table 11.1. 
(2)	The depth of cut referenced in the table shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the Public Development Director. 
TABLE 11.1. MAXIMUM CUT OR FILL SLOPES 

 
*Maximum distance of run to rise  **Guardrails required (see Standard Detail). 
Sec. 1104. - Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control. 
(a)	Title. This section will be known as the "Jackson County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Resolution." 
(b)	Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section (resolution), unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best Management Practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the publication published by the Commission Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
District: The Oconee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section. 
Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenway: An area along the course of any river, stream, creek, branch, lake, reservoir, pond, drainage system, spring, well or other body of surface or subsurface water, whether natural or artificial to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. Greenways are established pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Jurisdiction: That area over which the governing body has authority for planning, zoning and development permitting under the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices that are exempted under subsection 1104(c) of this section. 
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local Issuing Authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
NOT: A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this section. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Oconee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(c)	Exemptions. This section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters pursuant to Section 905 of this Development Code. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraph (15) of subsection 1104(d) of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this subsection; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(d)	Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices; generally. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by subsection 1104(c) of this section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 1104(d) and 1104(e) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. 
Minimum Requirements/BMPs shall be as follows: 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in subsections 1104(d) and 1104(e) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this paragraph the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The EPD Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	Jackson County may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection 1104(f), paragraph (15) in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements of this section. 
(6)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(e)	Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices; specifically. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this section; 
(15)	There is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the EPD Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the EPD Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
b.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer as long as final stabilization is achieved and as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(1)	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(f)	Application/permit process; generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the regulations of this Development Code pertaining to zoning, storm water management, subdivision, flood damage prevention, soil erosion (this section), and any other resolutions, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(g)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdiction without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Public Development Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 1104(h) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by a specified number of copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, Jackson County shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan (if the disturbed area is over 1 acre). The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to Jackson County. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variance required by paragraph (15) of subsection 1104(e) of this section has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required by paragraph (6) of this subsection has been obtained. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section of the Development Code, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, Jackson County may deny the permit application. 
(6)	Jackson County may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(h)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as specified in this section, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plans shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(3)	All Tertiary Plans must contain all items a required by the Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist, all buildings, sidewalks, driveways, and any other structural components such as walls, decks, and concrete pads. 
(4)	All Tertiary Plans must show Phase 1, 2, and 3 separately. 
(i)	Inspection and enforcement. 
(1)	An authorized representative of Jackson County will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, Jackson County shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(2)	The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(3)	Any authorized representatives of the Local Issuing Authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as they may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(4)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Jackson County, the EPD Commission, the EPD District, or EPD Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(5)	The EPD District or the EPD Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(6)	The EPD Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's adopted regulations and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(j)	Penalties; generally. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed for violations of this Development Code, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of Jackson County. 
(k)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section, the EPD Director or Jackson County shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the EPD Director or Jackson County shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the EPD Director or Jackson County shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by Jackson County or by the EPD Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by Jackson County or by the EPD Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(l)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, under the provisions of paragraph (6) of subsection 1104(g) of this section. Jackson County may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(m)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the EPD Director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances or resolutions, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(n)	Education and certification. 
(1)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(3)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(4)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(o)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any provisions of this Development Code; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Jackson County Board of Adjustments within thirty (30) days after receipt by Jackson County of written notice of appeal. 
(p)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of Jackson County, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Jackson County. 
(q)	Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon Jackson County or EPD District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 2a, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 14-005, § (1), 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 1105. - Flood damage prevention. 
(a)	Findings. 
(1)	The flood hazard areas of Jackson County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(3)	The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of Jackson County, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(b)	Purposes; applicability. It is the purpose of this section to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions applicable in the unincorporated areas of Jackson County designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(c)	Objectives. The objectives of this section are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)	Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(d)	Definitions related to flood damage prevention. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
Accessory Structure: A structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
Administrator: The Public Development Director or appointed designee, as defined herein. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the Public Development Director's interpretation of any provision of this section. 
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 1105(d) of this section. 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building: Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility: Any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps for that community. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 19, 1986 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by Jackson County). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure: Any structure that is: listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this section. 
Manufactured home: A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of the initial Flood insurance Rate Map and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 19, 1986 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by Jackson County) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after June 19, 1986 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by Jackson County). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD): Has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Public Development Director: The Director of the Department of Public Development of Jackson County, Georgia. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle, which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction: The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision: The division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Administrator or his or her designee, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this section, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section. 
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(e)	Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(1)	Flood Insurance Study. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Unincorporated Jackson County, dated November 16, 1990, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard until September 29, 2010. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Jackson County, Georgia and Incorporated Areas, dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard on and after September 29, 2010. 
(2)	Flood Insurance Rate Maps. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Unincorporated Jackson County, dated November 16, 1990, as may be amended, are adopted as if fully contained within this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard until September 29, 2010. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Jackson County, Georgia and Incorporated Areas, dated September 29, 2010, as may be amended, are adopted as if fully contained within this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard on and after September 29, 2010. 
(3)	Additional Areas of Special Flood Hazard. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a Flood Insurance Study. 
(4)	Repository. The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps is the Jackson County Department of Public Development, 67 Athens Street, Jefferson, Georgia, 30549. 
(5)	Flood Insurance Study. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Unincorporated Jackson County, dated November 16, 1990, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard until December 17, 2010. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Jackson County, Georgia and Incorporated Areas, dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard on and after December 17, 2010. 
(6)	Flood Insurance Rate Maps. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Unincorporated Jackson County, dated November 16, 1990, as may be amended, are adopted as if fully contained within this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard until December 17, 2010. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Jackson County, Georgia and Incorporated Areas, dated December 17, 2010, as may be amended, are adopted as if fully contained within this section and shall be the basis for determining areas of special flood hazard on and after December 17, 2010. 
(7)	Additional Areas of Special Flood Hazard. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a Flood Insurance Study. 
(8)	Repository. The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps is the Jackson County Department of Public Development, 67 Athens Street, Jefferson, Georgia, 30549. 
(f)	Flood area permit required. No development activity shall commence within an area regulated by this section until and unless a flood area permit shall have been approved by the Public Development Director. No development activity shall be approved unless it conforms with the provisions of this section prior to the commencement of any development activities. No building or structure shall be constructed within an area regulated by this section until and unless a flood area permit or building permit, or both if required shall have been approved by the Public Development Director. No building or structure shall be approved unless it conforms with the provisions of this section prior to the construction of said building or structure. See Section 1210, "Flood area permit," of this Development Code for permit application requirements and procedures. 
(g)	Administration; duties of administrator. The Public Development Director or appointed designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. Duties of the Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this section, then the Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of this section. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with this section. 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with this section. 
(7)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with this section. 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Make interpretations of this section. In the interpretation and application of this section all provisions shall be: considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the county, and; deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, resolution, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another ordinance or resolution conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this Article shall be maintained in the office of the Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(h)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in this section are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(2)	Only if the provision of this subsection above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(i)	General standards for all areas of special flood hazard. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Anchoring. New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	Flood-resistant materials. New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	Construction methods and practices. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)	Elevated buildings. In all areas of special flood hazard, all new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
c.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this section, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and the interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	Heating and air conditioning. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	Water supply. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)	Sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)	On-site sewage disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)	Nonconformities. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(j)	Specific standards for all areas of special flood hazard. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required for new construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of this section for "elevated buildings." All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this paragraph, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in this section. 
(3)	Manufactured homes. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(b)	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation; or the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(4)	Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(b)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(c)	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this section. 
(5)	Subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(6)	Critical facilities. Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(k)	Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in this section, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this section, then the Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this section. 
Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this section for "Elevated Buildings." 
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(l)	Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in this section, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with this section. 
(m)	Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in this section may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this section for "Elevated Buildings." The Administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this paragraph and as required in this section. 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(n)	Penalties for violations and enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions as authorized in Section 1306 of this Development Code, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to the provisions of Article 15, "Administration and Enforcement," of this Development Code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 2b, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-09, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 1106. - Installation of stormwater drainage facilities. 
(a)	Timing of installation. Construction of the stormwater system shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Storm water detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
(b)	Maintenance responsibilities. 
(1)	It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management plan during construction and for a two-year maintenance period following approval of the final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as applicable. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities at the completion of the construction. 
(2)	The owners of the property shall be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management plan to remain after construction is complete, following the two-year maintenance period. 
(3)	Should an owner or developer, whichever is the responsible party, fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the Public Development Department shall notify the responsible party in writing of the deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
(4)	If the responsible party fails to perform the required maintenance work within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum) then the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 1107. - Installation of streets and utilities. 
(a)	Grading. 
(1)	All streets shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
(2)	Preparation of roadway: Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
(3)	Grading shall be done in accordance with the Site Clearing and Grading Section of this Article. 
(b)	Installation of utilities; general. 
(1)	After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines shall be staked by the developer's Registered Land Surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities—water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, or any other underground utilities, and all service connections related thereto, that will be located under the street base shall be installed completely and provided throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Service connections for sanitary sewer (if required) and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
(2)	All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(3)	All utility locations shall correspond to the typical cross-sectional layout included in the Jackson County Standard Design Specifications. 
(4)	No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the Public Development Director. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they become damaged. 
(c)	Installation of public water system. If a public water system is to be installed, the improvements are to be reviewed, approved and inspected by the providing jurisdiction. Installation shall be coordinated with the construction of streets under the County's direction, as applicable. 
(d)	Installation of sanitary sewerage. 
(1)	Approval and permitting. If a public sanitary sewerage system is to be installed, the improvements are to be reviewed, approved and inspected by the providing jurisdiction. Installation shall be coordinated with the construction of streets under the County's direction, as applicable. 
(2)	Replacement of pavement. 
a.	General. Contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed, to a condition that is as near original condition as possible. 
b.	Pavement cuts. 
1.	All pavement cuts on County streets or roads shall be made by sawing prior to excavation to eliminate uneven and ragged edges. 
2.	All road cuts shall have a 6 inch thick concrete cap (3,000 psi in 28 days) which shall extend not less than 12 inches beyond the edges of the backfilled ditch. 
3.	Final asphalt patches shall match the existing pavement type but be no less than 1K> inches thick. Special care shall be exercised to match existing slopes and grades for a smooth transition. 
c.	Pavement replacement. Where sewer lines are installed in existing paved streets, the streets in which the sewer lines are installed shall receive full width asphalt repaving in accordance with these specifications. 
(3)	Location and protection of existing underground utilities. It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate all underground utilities and to protect same. Utility lines or services damaged by the contractor shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor's own expense. 
(e)	Street installation. 
(1)	After the earth work has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
(2)	If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the Public Development Department and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
(3)	Preparation of subgrade. 
a.	Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95% density. 
b.	When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 3 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
c.	This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
d.	It may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
e.	Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
1.	Provide break in the berm section when the curbing has not been constructed. 
2.	Use 6-inch pipe sections to provide drainage under curb to side slopes. 
(4)	Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
(5)	Street base, curbing and paving. Street base, curbing and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this Development Code. 
(f)	Testing requirements; streets. When testing is required by the Public Development Department, it is the responsibility of the developer to insure that all required tests are made and reported to the Public Development Department. The cost of all testing and quality control shall be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories. 
TABLE 11.2. TESTING REQUIREMENTS 

 
(g)	Protection of shoulders. 
(1)	Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. 
(2)	When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
(h)	Traffic control devices. 
(1)	A development plan shall be submitted to obtain street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization. 
(2)	Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, may be installed by the Jackson County Road Department or by an expectable private contractor meeting all local, state, and federal ordinances. 
(3)	A complete review of the required street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization will be provided after the development plans have been submitted for review to the Public Development Department. 
(4)	Once the list of required street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization has been determined the owner/operator can either provide payment to the Jackson County Road Department to install required items or install all devices as required. 
(5)	If devices are to be installed by the Jackson County Road Department, proof of payment must be submitted to public development prior to final plat. If devices are installed by a private contractor then all devices will be inspected by the Jackson County Roads Department for acceptance prior to approval of final plat. 
(i)	Installation of street lights. [Added 2-13-2006] This section applies to the installation of street lighting within existing or proposed public rights of way. Lighting provided on private property for the benefit of a single property owner is not governed by this section. 
(1)	Street lights must be installed and erected per the requirements listed in Section 1012 of this code; street lights must be installed prior to final plat approval or prior to the issuance of a certificate of site development plan compliance for multi-family or nonresidential projects. 
(2)	At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of a final plat or application for a certificate of site development plan conformance, the project developer shall: 
a.	Submit an application to the Department of Public Development requesting the creation of a Special Tax District for the purpose of providing for street lighting. 
b.	Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of streetlights within the development. This drawing must be approved by the Director of Public Development prior to the approval of a final plat or the issuance of a certificate of site development plan compliance. 
c.	Submit proof of payment to the respective utility company for the installation of the street lighting to the Department of Public Development. 
d.	Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(3)	After the submittal of all required information, the Director of Public Development, or his/her designee, will take action on the request of the creation of the special tax district as specified in the "Special Tax District Ordinance." 
(4)	Once approval has been given regarding the creation of the special tax district, but prior to the approval and recording of the final plat or issuance of a certificate of site development plan compliance the developer shall provide to Jackson County the following: 
a.	A billing agreement/account with the utility company for the provision of electrical service to the installed street lighting. This agreement/account must be in the name "Jackson County Board of Commissioners". Said agreement/account shall reference the name of the development/special tax district being served. 
b.	The pre-payment, to the Jackson County Board of Commissioners, for no less than the number of months required for the properties to be placed on the tax assessors records and be assessed for tax purposes, of electrical service for the installed street lighting system. Such fees shall be calculated based upon a per lot fee as established by the providing electrical utility. For the calculation of the appropriate pre-payment, "out lots", or lots that are determined to be un-buildable either because of soils, location of storm water detention facilities, or open space/common areas, shall not be included to determine the overall fee. 
(j)	Foreign material on streets. 
(1)	The developer, builders, and/or homeowners shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete, etc., off of the pavement and curbing of existing County or county roads during construction of buildings in all developments covered by these regulations. 
(2)	Before the streets are accepted by Jackson County, all litter and trash shall be removed from the dedicated rights-of-way and surrounding areas. 
(k)	Bridge piling. Bridge piling shall be driven to State Highway load standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by registered Professional Engineer. 
(l)	Burial of construction debris. No debris of any kind shall be buried at the site of any construction or development. 
(m)	Pavement Cuts. 
(1)	All utility construction plans within County right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the County Engineer. 
(2)	All trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened. 
a.	Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95% compaction. The backfill in all such ditches will be thoroughly compacted; the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
b.	Compaction tests at a rate of one per 150 feet of trench shall be provided to verify compaction. 
c.	Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90% compaction. 

(3)	The County's policy is no existing county roads can be open cut unless unusual circumstances warrant it. Storm sewers 36 inches or smaller shall be bored. Contact the County Engineer for permission to open cut any existing County road. If the County allows open cutting all trenches under existing paving shall be backfilled and compacted in 6-inch lifts. 
a.	The paving cut shall be widened to a minimum of 12 inches beyond the edges of the trench and excavated to allow for the 6 inches of 3000 psi concrete and 2 inches of asphaltic concrete to be placed. 
b.	The edges of the paving cut shall be smooth. 
c.	A final wearing surface of 2 inches of Type "E" asphaltic concrete shall be poured and rolled after the concrete is cured. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 4d, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 14-005, § (2), 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 1108. - Illegal discharge and illegal connections. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. 
(1)	The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law and to provide flood control. This section establishes methods for control the introduction of pollutants into the Jackson County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirement of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section are to: 
a.	Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system by any person. 
b.	Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the separate storm sewer system. 
c.	Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system. 
d.	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(b)	Applicability. 
(1)	The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the unincorporated limits of Jackson County. 
(c)	Responsibility for administration. 
(1)	The public development director or designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)	Prohibitions. 
(1)	Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
a.	No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the Jackson County separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
b.	No person shall discard any waste material, including but not limited to common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business or other location), upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area or point of entry to the county separate storm sewer system except for sanitation route collection as authorized by Jackson County. Every person occupying or having charge and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same. A prohibited disposal of waste material creates a danger to public health, safety, and welfare, and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or occupant of property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property. 
c.	The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the county separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
d.	The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
1.	Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if sufficiently treated to produce no detection of Total Residual Chlorine when analyzed to a specific detection limit of .05 mg per liter), non-commercial washing of vehicles, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
2.	Discharges or flows from firefighting and other discharges specified in writing by the Public Development Director or designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
3.	Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and/or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval from the authorizing governmental agency has been granted for any discharge to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system. 
(2)	Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
a.	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
b.	A person violates this section if the person causes a conveyance of sewage or septic effluent into the Jackson County separate storm sewer system or allows such a connection or conveyance to continue. 
c.	Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or, with the written approval of the Jackson County Public Development Director or designee, into the County sanitary sewer system. 
d.	Any drain or conveyance that has not been included in plans, maps, or otherwise documented and that may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the Public Development Director or designee requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice shall specify: 
1.	A reasonable time period of not more than ten working days, unless a longer period is authorized by the Public Development Director or designee, within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed. 
2.	That the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other. 
3.	That the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. 
e.	The results of the investigations of the property owner or occupant shall be documented and provided to the Public Development Director or designee. 
(e)	Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Public Development Director or designee prior to allowing discharges to the Jackson County separate storm sewer system. 
(f)	Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(1)	The public development director or designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)	If a property or facility has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the public development director or designee during normal business hours. 
(3)	The owner or operator shall allow the public development director or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination, and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(4)	The public development director or designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the public development director or designee, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(5)	The public development director or designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring, as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the public development director or designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated, to the satisfaction of the public development director or designee, to ensure their accuracy. 
(6)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the public development director or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(7)	Delays of more than five working days in allowing the public development director or designee access to a facility shall be a violation of this section. 
(g)	Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(1)	Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity, or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation that are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Jackson County separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(2)	Said person shall notify the Public Development Director or designee in person, by phone, or facsimile of the location, nature, quantity, and time of occurrence of the discharge no later than 24 hours following the discovery of the release. In the event a discharge is caused by or during a catastrophic event, state of emergency, or natural disaster, such notification shall occur within seven days of discovery. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the public development director or designee within three working days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence, provided such recurrence is preventable. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill, unless the discharge or spill was caused solely by the acts of a third party not under the control of the discharging entity. 
(3)	In the event of a release of hazardous materials as defined by 40 C.F.R. 355 and 40 C.F.R. 302, in an amount greater than or equal to the minimum reportable quantity as defined by 40 U.S.C. § 355.20 of the Environmental Planning and Right to Know Act ("EPCRA"), emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(4)	Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above shall be a violation of this section. 
(h)	Watercourse protection. 
(1)	Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation (excluding required stream buffers), excessive sediment, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, such that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(i)	Detention pond protection. 
(1)	Every person owning property, or such person's lessee, upon which a detention pond, swale, gulley, inlet, outlet and/or pipe, being part of said property, will maintain that part within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, excessive sediment and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. 
(j)	Violations and penalties. 
(1)	Violations. In the event the violation of any provision of this section constitutes an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare, the public development director or designee is authorized to, to take any and all measures provided by law to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
(2)	Notice of violation. If the public development director or designee determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the public development director or designee may order compliance by issuing a written notice of violation to the person responsible for the violation. 
a.	The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.	The name and address of the alleged violator. 
2.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred. 
3.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
4.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this section and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action. 
5.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
6.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the public development director or designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
b.	Such notice may require without limitation: 
1.	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting. 
2.	The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections. 
3.	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist. 
4.	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property. 
5.	Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs subject to issuance of a court order. 
6.	The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(3)	Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the public development director or designee. Appeals of an administrative decision will follow Section 1303 of this development code. 
(4)	Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the county board of commissioners upholding the decision of the public development director or designee, then representatives of Jackson County are authorized to take any and all measures provided by law to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to Jackson County by reason of such violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the public development director or designee may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in magistrate court of Jackson County court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 working days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(6)	Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(7)	Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law. Jackson County may seek cumulative remedies. Jackson County may also recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(k)	Compatibility with other regulations. 
(1)	This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment. 
( Ord. No. 14-005, § (3), 12-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 1109. - Stormwater management: post-development stormwater management. 
(a)	General provisions. 
(1)	Purpose and intent. 
a.	The purpose and intent of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure; safeguard the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of the public; and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
1.	Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
2.	Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats 
3.	Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
4.	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
5.	Encourage the use of non-structural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of open space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
6.	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and non-structural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or to the integrity of downstream water resources; and 
7.	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long term follow up. 
(2)	Applicability. 
a.	This article shall only be applicable to the area show on Map 11.1, Map 11.2 and Map 11.3 as included as part of this Development Code. 
b.	This article shall be applicable to all land development; including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless otherwise exempted. The provisions of this article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.	New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 1 acre or more; 
2.	Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of 1 acre or more; or 
3.	The development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development; even though multiple, separate, and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
c.	The following activities are exempt from this article: 
1.	Development of individual single-family residential lots that involve the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities less than 1 acre and are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
2.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family residential structures that involve the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities less than 1 acre; 
3.	Agriculture land management activities within areas zoned for such activities; 
4.	Land disturbing activities conducted for the purpose of restoration of streams, stream banks, riparian zones, or other environmentally protected areas; and 
5.	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the Public Development Director, designee or inspector. 
(3)	Responsibility for administration. 
a.	The public development director or designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(4)	Compatibility with other regulations. 
a.	This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(5)	Stormwater design manual. 
a.	The public development director shall utilize the policy, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards, set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as now and hereafter amended, and any relevant local requirements for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. This includes any addenda or updates to the local design guidelines as approved by the County Board of Commissioners 
(b)	Permit procedures and requirements. 
(1)	Stormwater management permit required. 
a.	No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first obtaining a stormwater management permit and meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
b.	Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer pro-posing a land development activity shall submit a stormwater management permit application to the public development department prior to initiating any land-disturbance. 
c.	Applications for a stormwater management permit shall be on a form provided by the public development department for that purpose and shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
1.	Stormwater concept plan in accordance with Section 1109(b)(2); 
2.	Stormwater management plan in accordance with Section 1109(b)(3); 
3.	Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Section 1109(b)(4), if applicable; 
4.	Maintenance surety in accordance with Section 1109(b)(5), if applicable; 
5.	Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with Section 1109(b)(6); 
6.	Construction drawings, stormwater hydrology, hydraulics report and site analysis; 
d.	Applications for a stormwater management permit that are incomplete or which otherwise do not meet the criteria set forth above, as determined by the public development department, shall not be reviewed by Jackson County. 
(2)	Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
a.	To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
1.	Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and pro-posed site layout sketch plans that illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. 
2.	Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources located on the site and within a ¼-mile radius of the site as they exist prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site; as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers, and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features. 
3.	Post-development stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system, including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
4.	Local watershed plans, green space program, greenway plan, park development plans, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(3)	Stormwater management plan requirements. 
a.	The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in Section 1109(c). 
b.	The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, who is qualified to address stormwater issues and who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices comply with the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
c.	The stormwater management plan must ensure compliance with the requirements and criteria in this article and demonstrate that opportunities are being taken to eliminate adverse post development stormwater runoff impacts from the development by ensuring a zero net increase. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. At a minimum, this includes: 
1.	Street address and legal description of site. 
2.	Vicinity map. 
3.	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydro-logic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions for the subject parcel with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types, and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For new developments, the base date shall be the year in which this article was originally adopted. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the following established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities: 
a.	For substantial developments (more than 5,000 square feet of impervious area), the predevelopment conditions shall be grass and trees. 
b.	For less 5,000 square feet of impervious, the predevelopment conditions are to not make the stormwater runoff rates, volumes and velocities any worse than they currently exist. 
4.	Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydro-logic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Subsection C of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
5.	Where the existing development is to be redeveloped, the applicant should attempt to make every reasonable effort to provide water quality and detention for the total land area of the redeveloped site, which may include but not be limited to underground detention and subsurface water quality treatment. 
6.	Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings, and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system shall include a map and/or drawing of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of non-structural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales, areas of overland flow; and BMP for post-construction clog prevention on all outlet control orifices with a diameter of four inches or less; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace program, greenway plans or any other relevant resource protection plans. 
7.	Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis that includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. At a minimum, the analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address: 
a.	A map of each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property; 
b.	Delineation of all downstream structures and property adjacent or within the flow path of the downstream flow analysis; 
c.	The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area; 
d.	In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes; 
e.	The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
f.	Where both channel protection volume and water quality volume requirements have been met, the public development director or designee may modify or waive the requirements for post-development downstream analysis on projects where the Stormwater Management Report demonstrates that post-development conditions provide a 15 percent reduction of post-development peak flows from pre-development peak flows for the 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year storm events. 
8.	Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan which satisfies the requirements of Section 1108 of the UDC. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
9.	Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the existing and proposed trees, landscaping and other vegetation within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and green space areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
10.	Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access, and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
11.	Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure adequate access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. Regular maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner's association or the property owner. 
12.	Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the public development director, as provided in Section 1109(b)(4), the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with this Development Code. 
13.	Evidence of acquisition of applicable environmental permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the public development department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(4)	Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
a.	Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder (examples not limited to stormwater pools, stormwater wetlands, and bio-retention areas) and for which the public development director or designee requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the Public Development Director or designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
b.	The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the public development director or designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the office of the Jackson County Clerk of Superior Court, real estate division upon final plat approval. 
c.	The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner(s). If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
d.	The inspection and maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. Copies of routine inspection summaries will be submitted in accordance with the approved maintenance plan. 
e.	In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the public development director or designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance as set forth in Section 1109(e). 
f.	The board of commissioners may, upon recommendation by the public development director or designee, accept, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this section and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(5)	Maintenance surety. 
a.	Prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit under this section, the applicant shall provide a maintenance bond as required per Section 1213(2)(j) of this Development Code. 
b.	In the event the applicant or responsible person fails to ensure adequate maintenance pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan, the owner of the facility/property shall take those steps necessary to correct the defective maintenance pursuant to the provisions of Section 1109(e)(1) At the option of the county, after providing notice as provided in Section 1109(4)(a), the public development director or designee may call the bond required in paragraph (a) of this Section to the extent that the proceeds of such bond are sufficient to reimburse the cost to the county of hiring a contractor to bring the site into full compliance with this section. 
(6)	Application procedure. 
a.	Applications for stormwater management permits shall be filed with the public development department. 
b.	Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection 1109(b)(1) of this section (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
c.	The public development or designee shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of receipt of the complete application whether the application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or denied. Any complete application for which no action has been taken after 30 business days or more shall be deemed to be approved. 
d.	If the permit application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement are denied, the written notification from the public development director or designee shall specify the reasons for the denial, and the applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. Such resubmittal shall be treated as a new application; however, no new application fee shall be required. 
e.	Upon a finding by the public development director or designee that the stormwater management permit application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement, meet the requirements of this section and the performance criteria set forth in Section 1109(c), the public development director shall issue a stormwater management permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
f.	Notwithstanding the issuance of the stormwater management permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.	The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this section and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development, and drainage will be completed ac-cording to the approved plan; 
2.	The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
3.	No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the public development director or designee; and 
4.	Upon completion of the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans pursuant to Section 1109(d)(2) of this section. 
g.	A violation of any provision of this section will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city. Should it be determined that a permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this section, the public development director or designee shall revoke the permit. 
(7)	Permit application fees. 
a.	The permit fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the county board of commissioners. The total fee due shall be submitted with the application and review of the application shall not begin until the permit application fee is paid in full. 
(8)	Stormwater management plan modifications for off-site facilities. 
a.	The stormwater management plan for each land development project should provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project. Where the physical characteristics of the site so dictate, as determined by the public development director or designee, the applicant may be allowed to modify the stormwater management plan to utilize an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. 
b.	A modified stormwater management plan must be submitted to the public development department that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
c.	To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public development director or designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
1.	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
2.	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
3.	Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
4.	Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
5.	Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
d.	The off-site or regional facility must be: 
1.	Located on property legally dedicated for the purpose; 
2.	Designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices; and 
3.	There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. 
e.	In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(c)	Post development stormwater management performance criteria. 
(1)	Water quality. 
a.	All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
1.	It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
2.	Appropriate structural stormwater controls or non-structural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
3.	Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the public development director or designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices, and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)	Stream channel protection. 
a.	Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following 3 approaches: 
1.	Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
2.	24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
3.	Post development erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control taking into consideration their location and size of outlet control structures. 
b.	The public development director or designee may modify or waive the detention requirements for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity. 
(3)	Overbank flooding protection. 
a.	Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm under subsection 1109(2)(B) is waived or modified, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
b.	The public development director or designee may modify or waive the provisions of Section 1109(3)(A) for sites where the post development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)	Extreme flooding protection. 
a.	Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and/or safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
b.	The public development director or designee may modify or waive the provisions of Section 1109(4)(A) for sites where the post development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)	Structural stormwater controls. 
a.	All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and de-signed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the public development director or designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
b.	In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the Public Development Director or designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to in-creased volume, frequency, and rat e of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollutions loads created on the site in question. 
c.	Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)	Stormwater credits for non-structural measures. 
a.	The use of 1 or more better site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under Section 1109(c)(1). The applicant may, if approved by the public development director or designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)	Drainage system guidelines. 
a.	Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way, public properties, and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than 1 parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
2.	All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
3.	Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(8)	Dam design guidelines. 
a.	Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam, as such term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-372(4), shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
(d)	Construction inspections of post development stormwater management system. 
(1)	Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
a.	Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the public development director, their designee, or conducted and certified by either a professional engineer, a registered landscape architect (RLA), or a registered surveyor (RLS), who is licensed in the State of Georgia and has been approved by the Public Development Director. Construction shall be inspected to establish compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
b.	All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
1.	The date and location of the inspection; 
2.	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
3.	Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
4.	Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
c.	If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions in accordance with the provisions of Section 1109(f)(1). 
(2)	Final inspection and as built plans. 
a.	Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or a final plat recorded, the applicant shall be responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. Refer to the standards and specifications for as-built criteria. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by either a professional engineer, a registered landscape architect (RLA), or a registered surveyor (RLS), who is licensed in the State of Georgia. A final inspection by the public development director or designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. The public development director or designee may verify the accuracy of the submitted as-built plans prior to the issuance of a final recorded plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(e)	Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(1)	Long term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
a.	Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan that are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan, and this section. 
b.	Where no maintenance agreement has been recorded, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility (detention/retention pond, swale, gulley, inlet, outlet and/or pipe) constructed on their property for storm water management pursuant to County requirements, to keep access points to the facility free of obstructions, and to keep the facility free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, excessive sediment and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the stormwater management facility. 
c.	A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the public development director or designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, and there is an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the public development director or designee may correct the violation as provided in Section 1109(a)(5) and 1109(e)(4) of this section. 
(2)	Right of entry for inspection. 
a.	The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall expressly allow the Public Development Director or designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this section is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this section. 
(3)	Records of maintenance activities. 
a.	Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall, upon his request, provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the public development director or designee. 
(4)	Failure to maintain. 
a.	If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the public development director or designee, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may refer the violation for legal action in accordance with Section 1109(f)(1) and 1109(f)(2) 
(f)	Violations and penalties. 
(1)	Notice of violation. 
a.	If the public development director or designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this section or is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured a stormwater management permit, the public development director or designee shall notify the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site by registered or certified mail to the person specified. 
b.	The applicant or other responsible person shall be provided a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days, to cure such violation; except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient; 
c.	Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured a stormwater management permit, the public development director shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a written notice. 
d.	The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
2.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
3.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
4.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the stormwater management permit, the stormwater management plan, or this section, and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action. 
e.	In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the public development director or designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or to restore the property. The public development director or designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as a delinquency. 
(2)	Penalties. 
a.	In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, or the time for filing an appeal has expired, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
1.	Stop work order. The public development director or designee may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall be in effect immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The public development director or designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The public development director or designee may suspend, revoke or modify any permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the public development director or designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the public development director shall deem appropriate, except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient, the public development director may refer the matter to magistrate court as provided in Section 1109(f)(2)(E). Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
5.	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the public development director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 14-005, § (3), 12-15-2014 ) 
ARTICLE 12. - PROCEDURES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 1201. - Purpose of Article 12. 
This Article describes the process through which a rezoning or special use may be approved on a property, the approval process for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, and the procedures for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and text of this Development Code. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
Sec. 1202. - Overlay—Land development. 
The following presents a summary of the plans and procedures involved in the land development approval and construction regulation process: 
(a)	Land use plan changes. Zoning map amendments are required by this Development Code to be consistent with the County's Comprehensive Plan's character area and future land use plan maps. If a particular zoning district is proposed for a property that is inconsistent with the 2020 character area map designation or the 2020 future land use plan map designation, or both, for such property the 2020 character area map or the 2020 future land use plan map of the Comprehensive Plan, or both, as the case may be, must first be amended as applied to the subject property to a character area and/or future land use category that is consistent with the proposed zoning district, as indicated in Table 2.1 (see Article 2, Section 205) before the zoning can be approved. In cases where an amendment to both the 2020 character area map and 2020 future land use plan map are required to support a rezoning application, such amendment proposals may be filed as a single application for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered as one application (only one filing fee shall be required). Such application shall be required to proceed under Section 1204 before any application for rezoning may proceed under Section 1205. Approv[al] shall automatically effectuate a change to the 2030 character area map, and any amendment to the 2020 future land use plan map approved shall automatically effectuate a change to the 2030 future land use plan map. 
(b)	Zoning changes (rezoning or special use approval). If the property is not appropriately zoned, a request for rezoning or approval of a special use must be approved prior to development or construction. A zoning change for a subdivision, multi-family or nonresidential project must include a concept plan showing the proposed layout of the building, parking lots, etc. 
(c)	Major subdivisions. [Amended 2/13/06] Permitting and construction of a major subdivision will be conducted substantially with the following flow chart: 
(1)	Project Approval is granted by the Public Development Department upon review and approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat. 
(2)	A Development Permit is issued by the Public Development Department based on review and approval of development plans for construction of the subdivision. 
(3)	Receipt and approval by the Public Development Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of improvements along with all other required documents as required by this Development Code, state, and federal rules and regulations shall [be] required prior to approving of a Final Plat, except as provided for in Section 1214(a)(4). [Amended 04/19/10] 
(4)	Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Public Development Department will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(5)	After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold. Building permits may be applied for provided that the subdivision is in compliance with the Jackson County Development Code and all applicable state and federal regulations except as provided for in Section 1214(a)(4). [Amended 04/19/10] 
(6)	The developer will be responsible for maintenance and repair of all public improvements for a minimum of two years or until at least 75 percent of the building lots receive a Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.). [Amended 04/19/10] 
(7)	All public improvements will be inspected by the County prior to the end of the maintenance period. After the developer has made any required repairs, public acceptance of the improvements shall be issued by the Director of Public Development. Acceptance of all improvements will allow the release of the maintenance bond. [Amended 04/19/10] 
(d)	Minor subdivisions. Approval of a minor subdivision shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)	Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Public Development Department will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(2)	After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold. Building permits may be obtained provided that the subdivision is in compliance with the Jackson County Development Code and all applicable state and federal regulations. [Amended 04/19/10] 
(e)	Multi-family residential projects. [Amended 04/19/10] 
(1)	Project Approval is granted by the Public Development Department upon review and approval of a Site Plan for the project. 
(2)	A Development Permit is issued by the Public Development Department based on review and approval of development plans for construction of the project. 
(3)	Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Public Development Department will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(4)	After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold. Building permits may be applied for provided that the subdivision is in compliance with the Jackson County Unified Development Code and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(5)	A Building Permit is issued by the Building Inspector based on review and approval of architectural plans. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshall shall be approved by the Fire Marshall prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(6)	Permanent electric power and occupancy of the building is authorized by the Building Inspector based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(f)	Nonresidential projects. [Amended 04/19/10] 
(1)	Project Approval is granted by the Public Development Department upon review and approval of a Site Plan for the project. 
(2)	A Development Permit is issued by the Public Development Department based on review and approval of development plans for construction of the project. 
(3)	If property is located within an overlay district additional approval must be granted by Public Development prior to a Building Permit being applied for. See Article 5. 
(4)	A Building Permit is issued by the Building Inspector based on review and approval of architectural plans. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshall shall be approved by the Fire Marshall prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(5)	Receipt by the Public Development Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of all improvements is required in order to apply for a Certificate of Compliance. 
(6)	Once the Certificate of Compliance is approved the Certificate of Occupancy may be applied for through the Building Official. 
(7)	Permanent electric power and occupancy of the building is authorized by the Building Inspector based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(8)	After both the Certificate of Compliance and the Certificate of Occupancy is issued the business license may be applied for. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5a—e, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ; Ord. No. 14-001, § (2), 1-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 1203. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-13, adopted Dec. 20, 2010, deleted § 1203 which pertained to definitions related to procedures and derived from the Unified Development Code of the county as adopted on Sept. 9, 2003. 
Sec. 1204. - Comprehensive Plan amendments. 
The Comprehensive Plan, including character area and future land use plan maps, may be amended from time to time by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this Section. Such a change is referred to as a Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
(a)	Initiation of a Comprehensive Plan amendment. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(1)	The Board of Commissioners and the Planning Commission are authorized to initiate an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan affecting the Comprehensive Plan as a whole, but only the Board of Commissioners may by resolution authorize the filing of a property-specific Comprehensive Plan amendment application on behalf of a property owner, to change the character area map designation, or the future land use plan designation, or both, of the specific property. All amendments to the Comprehensive Plan must be processed according to procedures, as applicable, established in the Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-1, "Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning" (aka "Local Planning Requirements") effective May 1, 2005, as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)	An owner of property is authorized to file an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan to change the character area map designation or future land use plan designation, or both, applied to property under his or her ownership. In cases where there is more than one owner of the subject property in question, approval of all owners of the property affected shall be required to file a Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
(3)	All applications by property owner or initiated by the Board of Commissioners on behalf of property owner shall be submitted to the Public Development Department on the Department's application forms. A non-refundable fee, if any, as set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, shall accompany all such applications. Completed forms, plus any information the applicant believes to be pertinent is to be filed with the Public Development Department. 
(4)	The Public Development Department shall review the application for completeness within 5 working days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The Department shall also, in consultation with the Northeast Georgia Regional Commission, determine if the application if approved would authorize development meeting the threshold of a "development of regional impact" as specified in Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, "Developments of Regional Impact," effective July 1, 2009, as may be amended from time to time. If the application is determined to qualify as a "Development of Regional Impact," then the procedures for processing and acting on said Comprehensive Plan amendment application shall be consistent with said rules to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. The Department shall also, in consultation with the Northeast Georgia Regional Commission, determine if the application is a "minor" or "major" Comprehensive Plan amendment as defined in and according to Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-1, "Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning" (aka "Local Planning Requirements") effective May 1, 2005, as may be amended from time to time (see Sec. 110-12-1-.08 Procedural Requirements). In making this determination of "major" or "minor," the procedures for processing and acting on said Comprehensive Plan amendment application shall be consistent with said rules to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. The Department shall notify the applicant of such determinations and convey to the applicant the extent to which procedures will be modified per requirements of state administrative rules. 
An application filed by a property owner for a Comprehensive Plan amendment which proposes to change a character area map designation or future land use plan designation, or both, affecting the same property shall not be considered by the Board of Commissioners more often than once every 12 months; provided, however, that the Board of Commissioners may approve a reduction in the waiting period as it deems appropriate for extenuating circumstances. 
(b)	Impact analyses. 
(1)	If the Comprehensive Plan amendment has been initiated by the property owner, the application must be accompanied by a written, documented analysis of the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment with regard to each of the standards for Comprehensive Plan amendments enumerated under Section 1204(d). If the Comprehensive Plan amendment initiated by a property owner would authorize development (if approved) that constitutes a "development of regional impact," said applicant shall submit impact analyses and all required information specified in Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, "Developments of Regional Impact," effective July 1, 2009, as may be amended from time to time, to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. 
(2)	An application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment which would authorize a proposed development that is capable of generating 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or more shall be accompanied by a traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, under guidelines available from the Public Development Department. Anticipated vehicle trips may be based upon the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The Director of Public Development may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. 
A traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, shall also be required for a proposed modification to a previously approved Comprehensive Plan amendment if the average daily vehicle trips will increase by 10 percent or more than calculated for the original Comprehensive Plan amendment approval, or average daily vehicle trips will exceed 1,000 for the first time. The Director of Public Development may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. 
For a Comprehensive Plan amendment which would authorize a proposed development that will generate fewer than 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or an increase of less than 10%, a traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, may be required by the Director of Public Development. Determination of such requirements will be made within 5 working days of receipt of the application for Comprehensive Plan amendment and must if required be submitted to the Director of Public Development at least 10 working days prior to the first public hearing on the Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
A traffic study, a hydrology study and/or other studies of the impact of the proposed development may be required by the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners as deemed necessary for adequate consideration and a fully-informed decision on the Comprehensive Plan amendment request, relative to the standards for Comprehensive Plan amendment consideration contained in Section 1204(d), below. 
(c)	Public hearings and decisions on Comprehensive Plan amendments. [Amended 2/13/06] Before the Board of Commissioners may take final action on a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment, the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall each hold a public hearing on the proposal as provided for in Section 1219 and thereafter shall be subject to the following requirements. No action shall be taken on the amendment until the review process mandated by state administrative rules for developments of regional impact and for Comprehensive Plan amendments shall have been completed, if applicable. 
(1)	The Planning Commission shall have 40 days following its public hearing in which to make its recommendation. Failure to make a recommendation shall go forward to the Board of Commissioners as "no comment." 
(2)	Following its public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the Comprehensive Plan amendment at the next meeting scheduled for the purpose of considering Comprehensive Plan amendments. 
In considering a Comprehensive Plan amendment, action shall be taken by vote of the members present. 
A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least 3 of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners. 
In taking final action on an application, the Board of Commissioners may: 
Approve or deny the proposal; or, 
Approve any portion of the area proposed for Comprehensive Plan amendment, thus reducing the boundaries of the area changed; or 
Approve the area or any portion of the area proposed for Comprehensive Plan amendment to a character area designation or future land use category different than that requested by the applicant; or, 
Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a six-month period during which another Comprehensive Plan amendment on affecting the same property may not be considered); or, 
Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
Return the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(d)	Standards for Comprehensive Plan amendment consideration. The Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following in evaluating a Comprehensive Plan amendment, giving due weight or priority to those factors particularly appropriate to the circumstances of the application: 
(1)	The extent to which a change in the economy, character, land use or development opportunities of the area has occurred. 
(2)	The extent to which the proposed amendment is in compliance with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
The extent to which the proposed amendment would require changes in the provision of public facilities and services. 
The extent to which the proposed amendment would impact the public health, safety, and welfare. 
The extent to which additional land area needs to be made available or developed for the specific type of use that would be authorized to be developed if the Comprehensive Plan amendment is approved. 
The extent to which area demographics or projections are not occurring as projected. 
(e)	Withdrawal of a Comprehensive Plan amendment application. Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment prior to final action by the Board of Commissioners shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Director of Public Development. 
(1)	If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing, the Director of Public Development shall withdraw the application administratively without restriction on the re-filing of a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment on the property in the future. 
(2)	If notice has been published (or is irretrievably set for publication) but the application has not been heard by the Planning Commission, the application may be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Public Development at the applicant's request, and an application for a Comprehensive Plan Applicants who choose to withdraw any request after the Planning Commission public hearing but before the Board of Commissioner's public hearing may do so, but an application for comprehensive plan amendment on the property shall not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
(3)	Should the applicant make any request for withdrawal after the Planning Commission hearing but before the Board of Commissioners hearing, the application shall remain on the Board of Commissioners' public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the Board of Commissioners. 
(f)	Effect of a land use plan amendment approval. Approval of a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
Sec. 1205. - Rezoning approval. 
The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the Board of Commissioners under the procedures in this Section. In addition, changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning approval may also be approved by the Board of Commissioners following the procedures in this Section. 
(a)	Initiation of rezoning proposal. 
(1)	The Board of Commissioners and the Planning Commission are authorized to initiate a text amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The Board of Commissioners may by resolution authorize the filing of a property-specific rezoning amendment application on behalf of a property owner. 
(2)	An owner of property is authorized to file an amendment to the Official Zoning Map to change the zoning district applied to property under his or her ownership. In cases where there is more than one owner of the subject property in question, approval of all owners of the property affected shall be required to file a rezoning application. All applications by a property owner or initiated by the Board of Commissioners on behalf of an property owner shall be submitted to the Public Development Department on the Department's application forms. A non-refundable fee, if any, as set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, shall accompany all such applications. Completed forms, plus any information the applicant believes to be pertinent is to be filed with the Public Development Department. [Amended 2/13/06] 
A pre-application meeting must be arranged and held with a Planning Division staff member to review the requirements of the UDC and site specific issues prior to the submittal of an application. [Amended 2/13/06] 
The Planning and Development Department shall review the application for completeness within five working days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to qualify as a "development of regional impact" as specified in Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, "Developments of Regional Impact," effective July 1, 2009, as may be amended from time, then the procedures for processing and acting on said rezoning application shall be consistent with said rules to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. The department shall notify the applicant of such determination and convey to the applicant the extent to which procedures will be modified per requirements of state administrative rules. 
(3)	If application is made for a change to a zoning district is requested, which is inconsistent with the 2020 character area designation or 2020 future land use district, or both, for the property in question, an application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment must first be filed by the applicant and considered by the Planning Commission and approved by the Board of Commissioners before the rezoning request can be considered. 
If the 2020 Character Area and/or Future Land Use Plan Map is amended such that the proposed zoning is consistent with said maps, then the rezoning can be considered, although it may be approved or denied for other reasons under the standards of Section 1204(d). See also Subsection 205(b)(6). 
If the Comprehensive Plan amendment is not approved and the proposed zoning district remains inconsistent with the 2020 character area designation or 2020 future land use district maps as applied to the subject property, then the rezoning cannot be approved and must be denied or withdrawn. 
An application for a rezoning affecting the same property shall not be considered by the Board of Commissioners more often than once every 12 months from the date of action by the Board of Commissioners either approving or denying the rezoning; provided, however, that the Board of Commissioners may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months. 
(b)	Rezoning concept plan. 
(1)	An application for a rezoning shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Development Code. 
(2)	A concept plan must be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, or a certified land planner. The applicant may prepare the concept plan if approved by the Public Development Director. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(3)	The concept plan shall be drawn to approximate scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract. 
(4)	The concept plan shall show the following: 
a.	Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries if they cross the property. 
b.	Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
c.	Proposed use of the property. 
d.	The proposed project layout including: 
1.	For residential subdivisions, and office or industrial parks, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
2.	For multi-family and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
(5)	The Concept Plan shall also indicate: 
a.	Name and address of the property owner. 
b.	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant (if different than the owner). 
c.	If drawn on a boundary survey: date of survey and source of datum, 
d.	Date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.	North point and approximate scale of the drawing. 
f.	Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.	Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location concept. 
h.	A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
i.	A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
j.	The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
k.	The approximate location of proposed access to the County road system. 
l.	Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(c)	Impact analyses. 
(1)	If the rezoning has been initiated by the property owner, the application must be accompanied by a written, documented analysis of the proposed rezoning with regard to each of the standards for rezoning enumerated under Section 1205(e). If the zoning amendment initiated by a property owner would authorize development (if approved) that constitutes a "development of regional impact," said applicant shall submit impact analyses and all required information specified in Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, "Developments of Regional Impact," effective July 1, 2009, as may be amended from time to time, to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. 
(2)	An application for a zoning amendment which would authorize a proposed development that is capable of generating 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or more shall be accompanied by a traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, under guidelines available from the Public Development Department. Anticipated vehicle trips may be based upon the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The Public Development Director may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(3)	A traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, shall also be required for a proposed modification to a previously approved rezoning if the average daily vehicle trips will increase by ten percent or more than calculated for the original rezoning approval, or average daily vehicle trips will exceed 1,000 for the first time. The Public Development Director may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(4)	For a proposed development that will generate fewer than 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or an increase of less than ten percent, a traffic study and a hydrology study, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, may be required by the Public Development Director. Determination of such requirements will be made within five working days of receipt of the application for rezoning and must be submitted to the and Public Development Directors at least five working days prior to the first public hearing. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(5)	A traffic study, a hydrology study and other studies of the impact of the proposed development may be required by the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners as deemed necessary for adequate consideration and a fully-informed decision on the rezoning request, relative to the standards for rezoning consideration contained in Section 1205(e), below. 
(d)	Decision actions for rezoning. [Renamed 2/13/06] Before the Board of Commissioners may take final action on a proposed rezoning, the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall each hold a public hearing on the proposal as provided for in section 1219. After the public hearing the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners will be guided by the following: 
(1)	The Planning Commission shall have 40 days following its public hearing in which to make its recommendation. Failure to make a recommendation shall go forward to the Board of Commissioners as "no comment." 
(2)	Following its public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the rezoning application at the next meeting scheduled for the purpose of considering zoning amendments. 
(3)	In considering a rezoning application, action shall be taken by vote of the members present. 
a.	A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
b.	If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
c.	A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
d.	If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners. 
(4)	In taking final action on an application, the Board of Commissioners may: 
a.	Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal; or, 
b.	Approve or approve with conditions any portion of the area proposed for rezoning, thus reducing the boundaries of the area rezoned; or 
c.	Rezone the area or any portion of the area proposed for rezoning to a zoning district different than that requested by the applicant; or, 
d.	Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a six-month period during which another zoning change on the property may not be considered); or, 
e.	Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
f.	Return the proposed rezoning to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(e)	Standards for rezoning consideration. 
(1)	Map amendments (rezoning). The Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following standards in considering any rezoning proposal, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
a.	Is the proposed use consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district that is being requested? 
b.	Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
c.	Will the proposed use not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
d.	Is the proposed use compatible with the goals, objectives, purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
e.	Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
f.	Will the proposed use not cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
g.	Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
h.	Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
(2)	Change in conditions of rezoning approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the Board of Commissioners through action on a rezoning shall require the filing of a new rezoning application to amend the condition or conditions of approval, and such rezoning application to amend conditions of zoning shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this Subsection. 
(f)	Withdrawal of rezoning request. [Amended 2/13/06] Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed rezoning prior to final action by the Board of Commissioners shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Director of Public Development. 
(1)	If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing, the Director of Public Development shall withdraw the application administratively without restriction on the re-filing of a proposed rezoning on the property in the future. 
(2)	If notice has been published (or is irretrievably set for publication) but the application has not been heard by the Planning Commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Public Development, and an application for a rezoning on the property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
(3)	Applicants who choose to withdraw any request after the Planning Commission public hearing but before the Board of Commissioner's public hearing may do so, but an application for rezoning on the property shall not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
(g)	Effect of rezoning approval. 
(1)	Approval of a rezoning shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
(2)	For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a rezoning affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code. 
(3)	Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a rezoning affecting the property may continue to completion in accordance with the provisions for Exemptions of Previously Issued Permits in Article 1 and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions of the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
Sec. 1206. - Special use approval. 
A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within said zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood or other pertinent considerations, may be found to be compatible and approved by the Governing Body in accordance with this development code. Special Use approval is limited to uses as stated in Table 2.2. Standards for special use consideration are listed in Section 1206(e). 
(a)	Initiation of special use request. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(1)	An owner of property is authorized to and may initiate an application for a special use for any property or properties under his or her ownership. In cases where there is more than one owner of the subject property in question, approval of all owners of the property affected shall be required to file the application for special use. 
(2)	All applications shall be submitted to the Public Development Department on the Department's application forms. A non-refundable fee, if any, as set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, shall accompany all such applications. Completed forms, plus any information the applicant believes to be pertinent is to be filed with the Public Development Department. 
(3)	The Public Development Department shall review the application for completeness within five days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. If the application is determined to qualify as a "development of regional impact" as specified in Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, "Developments of Regional Impact," effective July 1, 2009, as may be amended from time, then the procedures for processing and acting on said special use application shall be consistent with said rules to the extent they conflict with procedures established in this section. The department shall notify the applicant of such determination and convey to the applicant the extent to which procedures will be modified per requirements of state administrative rules. 
(4)	An application for a special use affecting the same property shall not be considered by the Board of Commissioners more often than once every 12 months from the date of action by the Board of Commissioners either approving or denying the special use; provided, however, that the Board of Commissioners may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months. 
(b)	Special use concept plan. 
(1)	An application for a special use shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Development Code. 
(2)	A concept plan may be prepared by the applicant, a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person familiar with land development activities. 
(3)	The concept plan shall be drawn to approximate scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract. 
(4)	The concept plan shall show the following: 
a.	Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries if they cross the property. 
b.	Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
c.	Proposed use of the property. 
d.	The proposed project layout including: 
1.	For residential subdivisions, and office or industrial parks, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
2.	For multi-family and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
3.	For master planned developments, areas designated for specific types of development are to be identified and the project layout for subdivisions and for multi-family or nonresidential development shall be shown as required under paragraphs d.1. and d.2. respectively, above. Areas set aside as buffers and common open space must be clearly delineated, along with identification of any primary conservation areas and the location of any proposed conservation easement. [Amended 2/13/06] 
e.	Master planned development concept plans must include such dimensions, calculations and tabular information as may be needed to clearly establish compliance with all requirements pertaining to such developments contained in this Development Code. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(5)	The Concept Plan shall also indicate: 
a.	Name and address of the property owner. 
b.	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant (if different than the owner). 
c.	If drawn on a boundary survey: date of survey and source of datum, 
d.	Date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.	North point and approximate scale of the drawing 
f.	Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.	Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location concept. 
h.	A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
i.	A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
j.	The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
k.	The approximate location of proposed access to the County road system. 
l.	Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(c)	Impact studies. [Amended 2/13/06] 
(1)	If the special use request has been initiated by an owner or their representative, the application must be accompanied by a written, documented analysis of the proposed special use with regard to each of the standards for special use enumerated under Section 1206(e). 
a.	A special use application for a proposed development that is capable of generating 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or more shall be accompanied by a traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, under guidelines available from the Public Development Department. Anticipated vehicle trips may be based upon the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The Public Development Director may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. 
b.	A traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, shall also be required for a proposed modification to a previously approved special use if the average daily vehicle trips will increase by ten percent or more than calculated for the original special use approval, or average daily vehicle trips will exceed 1,000 for the first time. The Public Development Director may waive these requirements when conditions warrant. 
c.	For a special use application which would authorize a proposed development that will generate fewer than 1,000 average daily vehicle trips or an increase of less than ten percent, a traffic study or a hydrology study, or both, prepared by professional engineers registered in Georgia, may be required by the Public Development Director. Determination of such requirements will be made within five working days of receipt of the application for the special use and must be submitted to the Public Development Director at least five working days prior to the first public hearing. 
(2)	A traffic study, a hydrology study and/or other studies of the impact of the proposed development may be required by the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners as deemed necessary for adequate consideration and a fully-informed decision on the special use application relative to the standards for special use consideration contained in Section 1206(e), below. 
(d)	Decision actions for special use approval. [Amended 2/13/06] Before the Board of Commissioners may take final action on a proposed special use, the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall each hold a public hearing on the proposal as provided for in section 1219. After the public hearing the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners will be guided by the following: 
(1)	The Planning Commission shall have 40 days following its public hearing in which to make its recommendation. Failure to make a recommendation shall go forward to the Board of Commissioners as "no comment." 
(2)	Following its public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the special use application at the next meeting scheduled for the purpose of considering special use applications. 
(3)	At the public hearing on the special use request, action shall be considered by vote of the members present, as follows: 
a.	A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
b.	If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
c.	A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
d.	If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners. 
(4)	In taking final action on an application, the Board of Commissioners may: 
a.	Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal; or, 
b.	Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a six-month period during which another special use on the property may not be considered); or, 
c.	Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
d.	Return the proposed to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(e)	Standards for special use consideration. 
(1)	Approval of special use. A special use otherwise permitted within a zoning district shall be considered to be compatible with other uses permitted in the district, provided that due consideration is given to the following objective criteria. Emphasis may be placed on those criteria most applicable to the specific use proposed: 
a.	Will the proposed special use be consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district in which it will be located? 
b.	Is the proposed special use compatible with the goals, objectives, purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
c.	Will the establishment of the special use impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses predominate in the area? 
d.	Is the location and character of the proposed special use consistent with a desirable pattern of development for the locality in general? 
e.	Is or will the type of street providing access to the use be adequate to serve the proposed special use? 
f.	Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
g.	Are or will public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to serve the special use? 
h.	Are or will refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property be located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor? 
i.	Will the hours and manner of operation of the special use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
j.	Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
(2)	Change in conditions of special use approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the Board of Commissioners through action on a special use shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this Section for a special use, as appropriate. 
(f)	Withdrawal of special use request. [Amended 2/13/06] Any applicant wishing to withdraw a special use application prior to final action by the Board of Commissioners shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Director of Public Development. 
(1)	If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Public Development without restriction on the re-filing of a proposed special use on the property in the future. 
(2)	If notice has been published (or is irretrievably set for publication) but the application has not been heard by the Planning Commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Public Development, and an application for a special use on the property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
(3)	Should any request for withdrawal be made by the applicant after the Planning Commission hearing but before the Board of Commissioners' hearing, the application shall remain on the Board of Commissioners' public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the Board of Commissioners. Applicants who choose to withdraw any request after the Planning Commission public hearing but before the Board of Commissioner's public hearing may do so, but an application for special use on the property shall not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
(g)	Effect of special use approval. 
(1)	Approval of a special use shall be in full force and effect upon approval by the Board of Commissioners. 
(2)	For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a special use approval affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions of the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code. 
(3)	Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a special use permit affecting the property may continue to completion in accordance with the provisions for Exemptions of Previously Issued Permits in Article 1 and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions of the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
Sec. 1207. - Project approval. 
The Public Development Department shall approve a preliminary plat for a major subdivision or a multi-family subdivision or a site plan for development of a nonresidential project prior to the issuance of a development/land disturbance permit. 
(a)	Responsibility for project approval. 
(1)	The Director of Public Development, or designee, is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats and site plans. 
(2)	The Director of Public Development shall forward a copy of the project approval application to other appropriate County Departments, and others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The applicant is responsible for submitting plans to the appropriate organizations as required NRCS, water and sewer authority, Georgia Department of Transportation, and Environmental Health Department. The Director of Public Development shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who then shall work directly with each department as necessary to resolve all identified issues. 
(3)	A preliminary plat or site plan shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person professionally familiar with land development and project construction activities. 

(b)	Procedure for project approval. 
(1)	A pre-application review with a preliminary concept plan is suggested. Such concept plan shall be the concept plan associated with rezoning or special use approval of the property, if any. 
(2)	An application for project approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
(3)	An application for project approval shall be submitted to the Public Development Department. The application shall include: 
a.	A properly completed application form and check-list, as furnished by the Public Development Department, requesting review for project approval. 
b.	The applicant shall submit preliminary subdivision plat or site plan showing the entire ownership drawn to specification of this section and the number of copies acquired by the Director of Public Development, together with an opinion of an attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia that the ownership shown on the plat or plan includes all record title holders, the nature of such ownership and the percentage of such ownership. 
c.	Payment of the applicable application and review fees as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
(4)	The Public Development Department will review the application for completeness within five business days of submission. Incomplete applications will be held until the application is completed. A letter of rejection of the application will be mailed to the applicant. No further review of the application will take place until a complete application is accepted. 
(5)	If the subdivision or development is to be served by public water, public sewer or individual septic systems the provider (JCWSA, municipalities, or Environmental Health) shall review the project for compliance with their adopted ordinances, rules, and regulations. The applicant shall be responsible for submitting proof to the Public Development Department that submittal of adequate plans and fees has been provided to these reviewing authorities. The applicant/developer is responsible for responding to the comments and conditions of these reviewing authorities. The respective water and sewer reviewing authorities shall sign the provided signature block (see section 1207(f)) prior to the Public Development Department issuing a development permit. 
(6)	If the subdivision includes or abuts a U.S. or State numbered highway, unless all of the lots in the subdivision contain 5 acres or more and no new street is involved, review by the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT) is required under O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. The applicant/developer is responsible for submitting and gaining approval from GDOT. The applicant is responsible for providing evidence of approval prior to the Public Development Department issuing a development permit. 
(7)	Following review of the application, the Public Development Department will indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. 
(8)	The owner is responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
(9)	The Public Development Department may not approve any preliminary subdivision plat or site plan that shows a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason. 
(10)	When the Public Development Department has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Development Code, it will be approved. The Director of Public Development will sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan. 
(11)	The Application for Certificate of Project Approval shall remain in effect for a period of 12 consecutive months after which time it shall be null and void if no Certificate has been issued. A new application for a Certificate of Project Approval shall be required before any permits will be issued. Submittal of all application fees shall also be required. All new codes and standards adopted prior to the submittal of the new application shall apply to the Project and will be required to be followed. 
(12)	The Certificate of Project Approval will shall remain in effect for a period of 6 consecutive months after which time it shall be null and void if development has not commenced and been diligently and continuously pursued. The timeline as indicated on the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan shall be followed. If at any time the project becomes 3 months or more behind the timeline without an extension request which sets forth reasonable cause for the delays which are beyond applicant/owner's control having been granted by the Director of Public Development, the Certificate of Project Approval shall be null and void. If the Certificate becomes null and void, a new application for Certificate of Project Approval shall be required. Submittal of all application fees shall also be required. All new codes and standards adopted prior to the submittal of the new application shall apply to the Project and will be required to be followed. 
(c)	General standards for project approval. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	The proposed name of the development and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development or street in the County. If shown to the contrary, the Public Development Department may refuse to accept such development or street names. The development may use letter designations in place of proposed street names at the option of the applicant. 
(2)	The preliminary plat or site plan shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
(3)	The preliminary subdivision plat or site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to 1 inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 36 inches by 42 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Director of Public Development may approve other sheet sizes and graphic scales as appropriate. 
(4)	For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Development, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
(d)	Preliminary plat or site plan requirements. Each preliminary plat or site plan shall show the following: 
(1)	Caption. 
a.	Proposed name of the development and its acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
b.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
c.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the applicant. 
d.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
e.	Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(2)	Proposed use of the property, including a statistical summary of development factors such as density, nonresidential floor area, number of lots or dwelling units, and minimum unit sizes, as may be pertinent to the type of project. 
(3)	Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(4)	Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than 1 inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(5)	Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of the lots to be re-subdivided. 
(6)	Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(7)	Rezoning or special use application number, date of approval, and stipulations (conditions of approval), as applicable. 
(8)	Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and stipulations (conditions of approval), as applicable. 
(9)	Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(10)	Natural features within the property, including: 
a.	All rivers and perennial streams, lakes, ponds and other state waters located on the property. 
b.	On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. 
c.	All Primary Conservation areas as defined under the Environmental Protection Article of this Code. 
d.	All Secondary Conservation Areas as defined under the Environmental Protection Article of this Code that are proposed to be protected. 
(11)	Protected groundwater recharge areas. 
(12)	Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features 
(13)	The proposed project layout including: 
a.	For subdivisions, lot lines and street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front building setback line and the dimension of its length on each lot (i.e., the lot width) and land to be reserved for public uses. 
b.	For multi-family and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
(14)	The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(15)	A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(16)	A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, location and results of percolation tests as required and approved by the County Health Department are to be shown. 
(17)	The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
(18)	Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
(e)	Engineer and owner certifications. Each preliminary plat or site plan is to include a certification by the engineer and by the owner that read as shown on Figure 12.1 and are signed in blue ink on the original drawing. 
FIGURE 12.1. 

 
(f)	Evidence of project approval. Each preliminary subdivision plat or site plan shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. Signed approval from the County Health Department (if septic tanks will be used). Certificate of Project Approval, to read as shown on Figure 12.2. 
FIGURE 12.2. 

  
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5f—i, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1208. - Development plans. 
(a)	General requirements. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	Persons seeking to undertake land-disturbing activity (as defined in this Development Code) shall not commence or proceed until development plans are approved and a development permit is issued by the Public Development Department. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in the Development Permit Section, below. 
(2)	The development plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Development Code, and shall include each of the plans in this Section as appropriate to the project. These include: 
a.	Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan; 
b.	Grading Plan; 
c.	Storm water Management Plan; 
d.	Street Improvement Plan; 
e.	Landscaping, Buffer and Tree Conservation Plans; and, 
f.	Public Utility Plans. 
(3)	All development plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in the State, except that the Landscaping, Buffer and Tree Conservation plans are to be prepared by or under the supervision of a landscape architect registered in the State. 
(4)	All development plans for a project shall be submitted in hard copy format in a number of copies as required by the Director of Public Development, and in digital form in a format acceptable by the Director of Public Development. 
(b)	Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan. Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans must be prepared to meet the requirements of Section 1104, "Soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control," of Article 11, "Land Development Activities," of this Development Code. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the erosion and sedimentation control requirements of the Land Development Activities Article of this Development Code. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issued of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; or through the use of alternate design criteria that conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. 
(2)	Data required for erosion and sedimentation control plan: 
a.	Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.	Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.	Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the developer. 
d.	Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
e.	Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters that "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.	Storm water and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.	Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(3)	Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sediment control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: [Amended 9-20-2004] 
a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.	Vicinity map showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.	Boundary line survey. 
d.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.	Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.	Spot elevations. 
1.	For sites smaller than 1 acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
2.	For sites of 1 acre and larger with slopes of less than 2 percent, show contours at intervals of not more than 2 feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels and swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
g.	Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
h.	The limits of the 100-year flood plain. 
i.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
j.	The limits of any required Greenway adjacent to streams, rivers and other state waters. 
k.	Location of erosion and sediment control measures using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sediment control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)	Grading plan. 
(1)	Grading plans shall identify existing and proposed topographic contour lines at the interval required for erosion and sedimentation control plans, above. 
(2)	Grading plans shall outline any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer, tree protection area or greenway (see the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article and the Environmental Protection Article of this Code) and shall identify and describe the protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such area. 
(3)	If the property contains any area of special flood hazard (the 100-year flood plain), grading plans in and around the flood plain shall be designed in conformance to all requirements relating to Flood Damage Prevention under the Land Development Activities Article of this Development Code. 
(d)	Storm water management plan. 
(1)	The Storm water Management Plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing storm water runoff. The developer shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. 
(2)	The minimum information submitted for support of a Storm water Management Plan shall be as follows: 
a.	Site plan. Provide a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet with the following characteristics and information: 
1.	Graphic scale, north arrow, and date. The north arrow shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
2.	Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers and streams. 
3.	Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
a)	For sites smaller than 1 acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
b)	For sites of 1 acre and larger, shown channels or scales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
c)	For sites of 1 acre and larger with slopes of more than 2 percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five feet. 
d)	Elevations shall be based on the datum plane established by the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey. 
4.	Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
5.	Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show the location of towers and poles. 
6.	Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
7.	Location of existing buildings and other improvements. 
8.	Proposed conditions. 
a)	Layout of proposed streets, roads, alleys, drives, paved areas and public crosswalks, with widths and road names or designations. 
b)	Preliminary plans of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlet. 
c)	Location of proposed buildings and other improvements. 
d)	Certification by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer attesting that the site plan has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards of this Section. 
b.	The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to Storm water Drainage under Article 9 of this Development Code. The Storm water Management Plan shall include: 
1.	Location and profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slopes of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade lines to be shown on all pipes that cross streets and on all detention basin outfalls. 
2.	Storm water detention facility design and construction details. 
3.	Location and typical construction details of all inlets and catch basins, headwalls and other drainage structures. 
4.	The 100-year ponding limits above each street cross drain. 
c.	The Stormwater Management Plan must also include: 
1.	The hydrologic and hydraulic analysis required for the system design under the Project Design Standards Article of this Development Code. 
2.	When required by the Director of Public Development, provide a soils investigation for all sites proposed as ponds or impoundments or for storm water detention [Amended 2-13-2006] 
3.	Provide a reconstruction schedule for both temporary and permanent facilities. Reference the schedule to other development activities such as clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading and vegetation establishment. 
4.	Provide a plan for maintenance of the storm water facilities. Describe specific actions and a recommended schedule of maintenance required to maintain the facilities at a satisfactory level of service. 
5.	Provide a cost estimate for construction of the storm water management facilities. Provide a separate estimate of the annual cost for maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
(e)	Street improvement plan. 
(1)	Center line profiles and typical street sections of all proposed streets shall be required. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widening. 
(2)	Where sanitary sewer or storm water sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(3)	Center line profiles covering streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this Development Code for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
(4)	All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)	A street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to 4 or more lanes. 
(f)	Landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans. All proposed landscaping as required by this Code in front and side landscape strips; for parking lot landscape areas, trees and street-side screening; in buffers; and trees to be retained or planted as required by the tree conservation provisions of this Code for multi-family and nonresidential development, shall be illustrated on plans as described in this Subsection. The plans may be consolidated as one plan if the information can be clearly shown. 
(1)	Site landscaping plan. 
a.	Scale at 1 inch = 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
b.	Caption. 
1.	The name of the development and its acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
2.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
3.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the applicant. 
4.	Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
5.	Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
c.	The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and storm water detention areas. 
d.	The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved or impervious surfaces. 
e.	The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
f.	The boundaries of all natural buffers, greenways and other areas required to remain undisturbed. 
g.	The boundaries of each required landscape strip. 
h.	A planting plan showing the location, size and common name of proposed plant materials. 
i.	The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this Code for landscape strips or parking lot landscaping. 
(2)	Buffer plan. A buffer plan shall be prepared for any natural or structural buffer required in accordance with the specifications and standards contained in this Development Code. The buffer plan shall show: 
a.	Caption, as required under 1208(f)(1)b for site landscaping plans. 
b.	The boundaries of each required buffer area. 
c.	The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and storm water detention areas. 
d.	For each natural buffer, the plan must show: 
1.	Methods to be employed to protect the critical root zones of the trees in the buffer from disturbance during construction, including fencing details, erosion control, signage, etc., consistent with the Protection of Existing Trees Section of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
2.	Proposed supplemental plantings required to maintain the opaque visual screen required. 
e.	For each structural buffer, the plan must show: 
1.	All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
2.	A planting plan showing the location, size and type of proposed plant materials. 
3.	The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this Code for buffers. 
4.	Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each buffer. 
(3)	Tree conservation plan. The tree conservation plan shall be submitted to the Public Development Department prior to any grading, bulldozing, or other removal of existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
a.	Tree conservation plan; preparation. The tree conservation plan for any multi-family or nonresidential development shall be related to the site plan for the project. Combination of the tree conservation plan and the site landscaping plan is encouraged. 
b.	The tree conservation plan shall include the following basics: 
1.	For multi-family or nonresidential development projects, scale at 1 inch = 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
2.	Caption, as required under 1208(f)(1)b for site landscaping plans. 
3.	The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and storm water detention areas. Off-site easements that may be affected by tree plantings must also be shown. 
4.	The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved or impervious surfaces. 
5.	The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
6.	The boundaries of all natural buffers, greenways and other areas required to remain undisturbed. 
7.	The boundaries of each required landscape strip. 
c.	The tree conservation plan shall show the following: 
1.	[Disturbed area.] The extent of the development site or disturbed area, the gross area of the site, and the net site area to which the tree conservation requirements apply. 
2.	Specimen trees. 
a)	Each specimen tree that will remain on the development site and be protected during construction, including its size in DBH and its common name; and all other trees or tree stands that are submitted for credit as part of the tree conservation requirement. 
b)	Grade changes or other work adjacent to a specimen tree that would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
3.	Tree plan. 
a)	Limits of tree conservation areas, showing existing trees to be retained and new trees to be planted, specifying type and size. 
b)	In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of trees in each stand that are submitted for credit by number and size (or size grouping by 3-inch spreads, such as 7-9 inches). 
c)	Calculations showing compliance with the tree unit requirements of the Tree Conservation Division of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
d)	Planting schedule, if applicable. 
e)	Curb stops to prevent vehicle overhang, where required to protect planting areas and vegetation. 
4.	Irrigation. 
a)	The tree conservation plan is to include a note indicating the type of irrigation to be used. If hand watering is the type to be used, the plan must show the location of water faucets or quick couplers that will be used for this purpose. 
b)	If an irrigation system is provided, a separate irrigation plan is to be submitted showing the location of lines and heads, the spray radius for each head, all valves (control, shut off, drainage, etc.), timer and rain sensor location. The name and telephone number of a responsible 24-hour emergency contact shall be prominently displayed on the plan. 
5.	During construction activities. 
a)	Methods to be employed to protect the critical root zones of the trees in the buffer from disturbance during construction, including fencing details, erosion control, signage, etc., consistent with the Protection of Existing Trees Section of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this Development Code. 
b)	Staging areas for parking, materials storage, concrete washout, and debris burn and tub grinding. 
6.	Additional information. Additional information that the Public Development Director may require to provide a full understanding of conditions on the site and the elements of the proposed tree conservation plan or during-construction activities. 
7.	Notes. Each tree conservation plan shall include notes clearly printed on each plan sheet, as shown in Figure 12.3. 
FIGURE 12.3. TREE CONSERVATION PLAN NOTES 

 
(g)	Public utility plans. 
(1)	Domestic water supply plan. If connection to a public water system is proposed or required, the domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the providing water jurisdiction. 
(2)	Sewage disposal plan. 
a.	If a connection to a public system is proposed, Sewage disposal plans are to include: Sanitary sewerage plans, including profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the providing sanitary sewer jurisdiction. 
b.	For projects approved to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation tests, and other information shall be shown as required by the County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5j, k, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1209. - Development permit. 
(a)	Responsibility for development actions. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity, including grading, clearing and grubbing, tree clearance, land development or project construction without first obtaining a development/land disturbance permit from the Public Development Department to perform such activity. 
(2)	Prior to beginning any development an application for a development/land disturbance permit shall be submitted to the Public Development Department, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this Development Code. If the applicant is not the property owner then the property owner shall authorize, the submittal of the development/land disturbance permit application. Both the operator and the property owner must sign off on the development/land disturbance permit. 
(3)	The Public Development Department is responsible for administering the review and approval process for issuance of development/land disturbance permits. The Public Development Department shall forward a copy of the development permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to the Soil and Water Conservation Commission District, and others as appropriate, for their review and comment. Additionally, the owner/operator is responsible for submitting separate review applications with the providing water and sewer authority and/or Environmental Health. The Public Development Department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, and shall issue the development permit when all requirements of this Development Code and the rules and regulations of the appropriate reviewing agencies have been met. 
(4)	Approval of plans by the Public Development Department shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or any other profession, from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(5)	The completion of inspections and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(6)	No development/land disturbance permit shall be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and other regulations. Any development/land disturbance permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this Development Code shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
(7)	Liability. 
a.	The approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan or other plans under the provisions of this Development Code, the issuance of a development permit, or the compliance with any other provisions of this Development Code shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Board of Commissioners or the Soil and Water Conservation District for damage to any person or property. 
b.	The fact that any activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this Development Code or the terms of the development/land disturbance permit. 
(b)	Development activities authorized. A development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity regulated by this Code, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
(c)	Process for approval of development permit. [Amended 2-13-2006] An application for a development permit may proceed simultaneously with an application for a preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, but may not be issued prior to project approval of such plat or plan by the Public Development Department. 
(1)	The application for a development permit shall be submitted to the Public Development Department and must include the following: 
a.	Application on the form furnished by the Public Development Department, requesting review for issuance of a development permit. 
b.	Evidence that the applicant has complied with the "Notice of Intent" (NOI) requirements of the Georgia General Storm water Permit for authorization under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) to discharge storm water associated with construction activity (if applicable). A copy of the NOI form and a copy of the certified mail return receipt request card indicating receipt by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
c.	The following plans shall be submitted in a number of copies required by the Director of Public Development: 
1.	The preliminary plat or site plan requesting or reflecting project approval by the Public Development Department. 
2.	The civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards in this Development Code. 
d.	Payment of any development permit fee, as established from time to time by the Board of Commissioners. 
e.	In addition to fees established separately by the Board of Commissioners, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per disturbed acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the development permit. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted directly to and payable to Jackson County; the other half of such fees shall be submitted directly to EPD; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to EPD, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(2)	The application will be checked for completeness within 5 days of its submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(3)	Upon acceptance of a development permit application, the Public Development Department shall refer the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Soil & Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. No development permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances and bonding, if required, have been obtained. 
(4)	The applicant may be required by the Public Development Department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
a.	County Engineer. 
b.	Fire Marshal. 
c.	County Health Department. 
d.	Soil and Water Conservation District. 
e.	Georgia Department of Transportation. 
f.	Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
g.	U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
h.	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)	Upon receipt of comments from other departments and agencies, the Public Development Department will indicate on a copy of the civil design and construction drawings or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Development Code, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations or ordinances, as appropriate. 
(6)	The Public Development Department will forward its comments to the applicant. 
(7)	The applicant will be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments received. The owner will also be responsible for obtaining approval from all other agencies affected by the project. 
(8)	No development permit will be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the County Tax Commissioner's office certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(d)	Required performance surety. 
(1)	Project Performance Surety. Upon approval of the Development Plans but before the issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond and cash escrow for the project. The performance bond shall be in a format acceptable to the County Attorney and the performance surety shall remain and not expire until approval of the final plat or a certificate/letter of substantial completion for the project is given. The performance bond will be 100 percent of the amount listed below and at least 50 percent shall be in the form of a cash escrow. 

 
(e)	Issuance of development/land disturbance permit. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	Following satisfaction of all comments, receipt of approvals from all affected agencies and receipt of all required bonds, the Public Development Department shall issue a development/land disturbance permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
(2)	No development/land disturbance permit shall be issued unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, the public utility plans have been approved by the appropriate public water and/or sewer provider, project approval has been granted by the Public Development Department, and the Public Development Department has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with all requirements of this Development Code and the rules and regulations of the appropriate reviewing agencies have been met. If the development permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (Amended 10-20-2008) 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate development/land disturbance permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)	The development/land disturbance permit may be suspended, revoked or modified, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, the public utility plan, or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Development Code or the applicable standards of any other agency with review and approval authority in this development. A holder of a development permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan or the conditions contained in the development/land disturbance permit. 
(f)	Expiration of development/land disturbance permit. 
(1)	A development/land disturbance permit shall remain in effect for a period of 6 consecutive months after which time it will become null and void and a new permit will be required if no development activity has begun and diligently pursued. The timeline as indicated on the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan will be required to be followed, if at anytime the project becomes behind 3 months or more the development permit will be come null and void and a new permit will be required. If the permit becomes null and void a new application for Certificate of Project Approval must be applied for to include new fees. All new codes and standards will be required to be followed. 
(2)	Any development permit that has expired may be renewed by the Public Development Department within 6 months of expiration. If a development permit has expired for more than 6 months, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new development permit under the development permit approval process of this Development Code. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5l—o, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1210. - Flood area permit. 
(a)	Required. As required by Section 1105(f) of this Development Code, no development activity shall commence within an area regulated by Section 1105 until and unless a flood area permit shall have been approved by the Public Development Director. No development activity shall be approved unless it conforms with the provisions of Section 1105 prior to the commencement of any development activities. No building or structure shall be constructed within an area regulated by this section until and unless a flood area permit or building permit, or both if required shall have been approved by the Public Development Director. No building or structure shall be approved unless it conforms with the provisions of Section 1105 prior to the construction of said building or structure. 
(b)	Permit procedures. Application for a flood area permit shall be made to the Public Development Department on forms furnished by the department prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in sufficient number as specified by the department, drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(c)	Specific information required—Application stage. The following information is required at the application stage: 
(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(3)	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 1105 of this Development Code; and 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(d)	Specific information required—Construction stage. The following information is required at the construction stage: 
(1)	For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Public Development Department an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
a.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Public Development Director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 3a, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1211. - Driveway permit. 
(a)	Driveway permit; when required. 
(1)	No driveway connecting to a public street or a public right-of-way or public property shall be repaired or installed without first having approval from the Public Development Department. If the driveway connects to a State or U.S. numbered highway, approval of the Georgia Dept. of Transportation shall be required prior to County approval. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Applications may be made to the Building Inspector's office. 
(b)	Driveway permit; expiration. A permit shall expire for work not started within 90 days or completed within 6 months after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. 
Sec. 1212. - Right-of-way encroachment permit. 
(a)	Right-of-way encroachment permit; when required. 
(1)	Any utility work, encroachments into a public right-of-way or easement, pavement cuts and associated road or lane closures must be reviewed, approved and permitted by the County Engineer. 
(2)	Applications may be made to the County Engineer's office. 
(b)	Right-of-way encroachment permit; expiration. A right-of-way encroachment permit shall expire for work not started within 90 days or completed within 6 months after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. 
Sec. 1213. - Final subdivision plat. 
(a)	Responsibility. 
(1)	The Director of Public Development shall be responsible for coordination of the approval process for all final subdivision plats. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	The final subdivision plat shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
(3)	The owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this Development Code. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of this responsibility. 
(b)	Procedures for final plat approval. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, either: 
a.	All public improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this Development Code (other than traffic signs, street name signs, street striping, and signalization) and as-built surveys of the improvements shall have been approved by the Public Development Director as required in the Land Development Activities Article of this Code; or, 
b.	A guarantee in lieu of completed improvements shall have been received by the Public Development Department and approved by the Board of Commissioners as provided under the Project Design Standards Article of this Development Code. 
(2)	An application for a final subdivision plat approval shall be made to the Public Development Department. The application shall include: 
a.	The name and address of the person to whom the notice of approval shall be sent. 
b.	A properly completed application form and check-list, as furnished by the Public Development Department, requesting final subdivision plat review. 
c.	Executed Storm Water Management Facility Maintenance Agreement. 
d.	The final subdivision plat drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications in this Section, the original of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on cloth or film in a number of copies required by the Director of Public Development. 
e.	The as-built surveys of the improvements as required in the Land Development Activities Article of this Code if the surveys have not been previously received and approved. 
f.	Payment of all applicable final subdivision plat filing and recording fees, as established by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. 
g.	Payment for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs, submitted to the Roads Department. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be paid to the Roads Department. Receipt of payment must be submitted to Public Development Department. 
h.	Executed deeds for the dedication of all street rights-of-way, easements and other problem properties, together with an opinion of an attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia, that the deeds have been properly executed by the record title owner and if such title owner is not a natural person, execution of such deeds was properly authorized in accordance with applicable law and the governance documents of the entity which is the title owner. 
i.	Protective Covenants shall be required for all subdivisions in which five or more lots are created. Protective Covenants shall be submitted for review together with an opinion of an attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia that the covenants have been properly executed by the record title owner and if such title owner is not a natural person, execution of such covenants was properly authorized in accordance with applicable law and the governance documents of the entity which is the title owner. At a minimum, the protective covenants shall create a homeowner's association for the subdivision with mandatory membership of all property owners and mandatory dues, and shall be recorded with the final plat. See the Subdivisions and Master Planned Communities Article of this Code regarding homeowners' associations. 
j.	A maintenance bond providing adequate surety for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this Development Code in the subdivision for a period of 2 years following the date of approval of the final plat or until 75% of the buildable lots have received a Certificate of Occupancy, whichever is greater. The maintenance bond shall be in a format acceptable to the County Attorney. The maintenance bond will be 100 percent of the amount listed below and at least 50 percent in the form of a cash escrow. 

 
(3)	The Public Development Department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(4)	If the subdivision includes or abuts a U.S. or State numbered highway, unless all of the lots in the subdivision contain 5 acres or more and no new street is involved, review by the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT) is required under O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. If the subdivision is an exempt or minor subdivision or otherwise was not submitted for review as a preliminary plat, two additional copies of the final plat must be submitted to the Public Development Department for forwarding to DOT. The owner or subdivider must respond to the recommendations of the DOT prior to final plat recording. If the written recommendations of the DOT are not made within 30 days of receipt of the plat by DOT, their approval shall be assumed as provided under State law. 
(5)	If the subdivision is to be served by a public water and/or sewer service provider, review of the proposed final plat by the appropriate water and/or sewer provider for compliance with the applicable standards, rules, and regulations of that entity is required. The owner or developer must respond to the requirements of the service provider prior to final plat recording. The applicant is responsible for actively acquiring comments from a water or sewer provider if they have not received formal comments within 30 days of submission of these plans to the said provider and the final plat shall not be approved for recording until the water and sewer providers sign the final plats. (Added 10-20-2008) 
(6)	Within 2 weeks following receipt of the application, the Public Development Department shall indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. The Director of Public Development shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this Development Code to the final plat. 
(7)	The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements, and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments of the Public Development Department. Resubmission of all revised drawings shall be made to the Public Development Department. 
(8)	When all of the requirements of this Development Code, and any conditions of zoning approval, have been met, the Director of Public Development shall sign and date the Certificate Of Final Plat Approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. 
(9)	Once the final subdivision plat has been so certified, it shall be recorded by the applicant with the Public Development Director's approval, with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(10)	The Director of Public Development will forward the executed deeds for the streets, easements and dedication of other public properties, and the conservation easement, if applicable, to the Board of Commissioners for approval and recording. The Director of Public Development will also coordinate the creation of any special tax district by the Board of Commissioners as may be required by this Development Code. 
(11)	Subsequent to the recording of the final plat, one copy on cloth or film, one additional hard copy with all certificates endorsed thereon, and one digital copy in a format acceptable to the Director of Public Development shall be filed with the records of the Public Development Department. The Map book, volume and page numbers where the plat is recorded shall also be indicated on the copies. 
(c)	General standards for final plats. 
(1)	The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by Georgia law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67), and as acceptable to the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(2)	Final subdivision plats must be at least 8½ inches by 11 inches in size to be recorded. The maximum sheet size is 18 inches by 24 inches to the sheet edge, with a maximum image area of 17 inches by 22 inches. 
(3)	The final subdivision plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this Development Code. 
(d)	Final plat requirements. The final subdivision plat shall contain all caption information and plat data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps or plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended), as well as the additional information required in this Subsection. 
(1)	Caption. The maps or plats shall have a title or name, including the name of the subdivision, which shall be contained in the caption and the caption shall also provide the following information: 
a.	The county, land district and land lot, and subdivision, if the property lies within a particular subdivision; 
b.	The date of plat preparation; 
c.	The scale, stated and shown graphically; 
d.	The name, address, telephone number, and registration number of the land surveyor or the statement that he is the county surveyor and is not required by law to be a registered surveyor; and 
e.	All reproductions of original maps or plats shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registrant placed across the registration seal in order to be a valid or recordable map or plat. 
(2)	Plat data. Maps or plats shall be made in a professional manner and in accordance with the standards of good drafting procedures and shall show the following information, as specified: 
a.	All maps or plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the individual survey, and such additional data as may be required to relocate the boundary point from the point of reference with the same degree of accuracy required of the parcel surveyed. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record; 
b.	All maps or plats of boundary surveys or subdivision surveys shall show bearings of all lines of the boundary or lot lines, and distances of all boundary or lot lines, and area of the parcels expressed in acres or square feet; 
c.	All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights of way adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference; 
d.	All maps or plats shall show easements and apparent encroachments, if pertinent; 
e.	In the case of curved lines, the curve shall be defined by curve data to include the radius, arc length, chord bearing, and distance for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves; 
f.	All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures; 
g.	All corner markers and markers of pertinent reference points shall be fully described and indicated as to their material or types and shall be constructed of a permanent material such as iron, steel, concrete, or stone, as required for survey monuments under the Project Design Standards Article of this Code; 
h.	An arrow shall be shown on the map or plat to indicate the principal meridian, and a notation shall be made as to the reference of bearings to magnetic north, astronomic north, or grid north. A grid north reference shall indicate the zone; 
i.	All linear distances shown on maps or plats shall be horizontal; 
j.	All angular directions shown on maps or plats shall be represented in degrees and minutes. Where plats state or surveys require accuracy in excess of 1 in 5,000, the angular directions shall be represented in degrees, minutes, and seconds. All angular directions shall be referenced to the principal meridian; and 
k.	All maps or plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a National Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property mapped or platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
(3)	Additional data. The following is to be shown on the final plat in addition to the caption information and plat data required by Georgia law: 
a.	Street names including both the name and the suffix, such as "street," "avenue," etc.; 
b.	Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided; 
c.	Location sketch; 
d.	Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners; 
e.	Building front setback liens with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way; 
f.	Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; 
g.	Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use; 
h.	The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this Development Code; and 
i.	The street address number of each lot. 
(4)	Curve data shall be required for all roadway centerline curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. Centerline data including the radius, central angle, arc length, chord bearing and distance, and tangent distance between curves must be given for regular curves. Chord distances and directions shall be given for irregular curves on preexisting roads. 
(5)	After approval of the final plat but prior to recording, the street address number shall be shown on each lot as assigned by the Public Development Department. 
(e)	Certification by the Health Department. Certification by the Health Department shall be printed or stamped on the plat, as appropriate to the source of water supply and method of waste disposal approved. For lots not served by public sewerage or public water, the certification by the Health Department is to read as shown on Figure 12.4 and signed in blue ink on the original drawing. For developments with public sewerage and public water systems, this certification may be omitted. 
FIGURE 12.4. 

 
(f)	Surveyor and owner certificates. Each final subdivision plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat to read as shown on Figure 12.5. The original certificates on the reproducible copy of the final plat shall be signed and dated. 
(1)	Surveyor's Certificate, signed in blue ink on the original drawing. 
(2)	Surveyor's Seal. The reproducible final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
(3)	Owner's Certificate, signed in blue ink on the original drawing. 
FIGURE 12.5. 

 
(g)	Statement of private covenants. A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: "This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ____________ , which hereby becomes part of this plat." 
(h)	Certificate of final subdivision plat approval. The certificate of final plat approval shall be stamped or printed on the final subdivision plat for execution upon its approval by the Director of Public Development. Appropriate certificates for different types of subdivisions are shown in Figure 12.6. 
FIGURE 12.6. 

 
(i)	Creation of homeowners association. If required by provisions of this Development Code, a homeowners' association shall be created and the instruments of such creation and financial endowment shall be recorded at the time of final plat recording. A copy of the recorded instruments shall be filed with the Public Development Department. 
(j)	Acceptance of public improvements. 
(1)	If construction of any required public improvements was deferred at the time of final plat approval in accordance with the provisions under Guarantee in Lieu of Completed Improvements in the Project Design Standards Article of this Code, said work must be completed within 9 months. 
(2)	The developer shall maintain the improvements in the development for a period of 2 years or until Certificates of Occupancy have been issued on 75% of the principal buildings on the lots shown on the final subdivision plat, whichever occurs later. The maintenance period shall begin upon recordation of the final subdivision plat and continue until at least 2 years after completion of all deferred improvements, if any. 
(3)	The developer initially shall obtain a maintenance bond or other surety acceptable to the County Attorney for a two-year period commencing on the date of final plat recordation; an additional two-year bond or other surety shall be obtained commencing on the date of completion of any improvements deferred at the time of final plat recordation. Such bonds or other surety shall be renewed or extended, if necessary, until Certificates of Occupancy have been issued on 75% of the principal buildings on the lots shown on the final subdivision plat. 
(4)	Prior to expiration of the maintenance period, a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements shall be conducted by the Public Development Department. 
(5)	The owner must correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
(6)	Upon certification by the Public Development Director that the public improvements depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this Development Code and are in good repair, the Board of Commissioners shall release the maintenance bond and accept the public improvements into perpetual maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5p, q, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1214. - Building permitting. 
(a)	Procedures to obtain a building permit. A building permit issued by the Building Official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure in accordance the provisions of the building code. No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the county unless access has been established in accordance with this Development Code. No building permits shall be issued before approval of the final plat. All structures shall comply with the requirements of this Development Code, whether or not a building permit is required. 
(1)	For any structure served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit issued by the County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a Building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the County Health Department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
(2)	Procedure for approval. The Building Official is responsible for administering and enforcing the building codes of the County. 
a.	Prior to issuance of a building permit the owner shall have received a development permit if required by this Development Code. 
b.	Zoning verification shall be obtained from the Public Development Department. The following shall be attached to the Zoning Verification Application [Amended 2-13-2006]: 
1.	For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat or other indication of the location of the lot. 
2.	For a multi-family or nonresidential building, the site plan upon which was granted project approval by the Public Development Department. 
3.	A street address number as shown on the final plat or as assigned by 911. 
c.	Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector. The application shall include: 
1.	Application on the form furnished by the Building Inspector, requesting issuance of a building permit. 
2.	A copy of the zoning verification approved by the Public Development Department. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
3.	Two sets of the building plans drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot if buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. 
4.	The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Building Inspector, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this Code. 
5.	For principal multi-family or nonresidential buildings prepared in conformance with this Development Code and the applicable building codes, plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of an architect registered in Georgia, who shall sign and seal each sheet in the original set of drawings. 
6.	County Health Department Approval if an on-site sewage disposal system has been allowed. 
7.	Payment of the building permit application and review fee. 
8.	Water meter receipt issued by the Public Utilities Department. 
9.	Provide the proof of a Primary, Secondary or Tertiary NOI being submitted (as required). 
d.	The application will be checked by the Building Inspector for completeness within 5 days. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
e.	Within 2 weeks following receipt of a complete application, The Building Inspector shall indicate on the building plans approval or disapproval and attest to same by his signature. One copy shall be returned to the applicant and the original copy shall be retained by the Building Inspector. 
f.	The owner shall be responsible for compliance with this Development Code and all building code requirements, regulations, and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the Building Inspector. 
g.	At such time as the owner has addressed the comments to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector and the State Fire Marshall, a building permit will be issued for the structure. 
h.	Plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be issued separately by the Building Inspector or separately identified on the building permit. Such permits must be issued prior to commencement of work by each affected trade. 
(3)	If the work authorized by a building permit has not begun within 6 months from the date of issuance the permit shall expire, unless it is renewed under the provisions of the building code. 
(4)	Standards for approval. 
a.	Building permits shall be issued only on buildable lots of record, as defined in this Development Code. 
b.	Building permits shall be issued in conformance with the adopted technical codes and supplements that constitute the County's building code. Conformance to this Development Code is also required as a prerequisite to issuance of a building permit. 
c.	Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this subsection (a)(4) and in Section 1202(c)(5) of the Development Code regarding compliance with this Development Code, building permits may be issued in either of the following circumstances: 1) for work related to repair of damage to existing structures, for which a building permit has [been] issued, when such damage results from inclement weather, fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or other similar natural disaster; 2) permitting of accessory structures for existing structures for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued and that have been occupied by at least one resident; or 3) permitting of additions to primary structures (e.g. porches, decks, room additions). 
(b)	Building inspection. [Added 2-13-2006] 
(1)	Scheduling a building inspection. Inspections shall be scheduled with the Building Inspector at least 48 hours before the inspection is needed. Requests for inspection should include the street address, lot number, building permit number, and type of inspection. 
(2)	Required inspections. 
a.	Foundation. Verify minimum required building setbacks, footing, trenches dug and reinforcing steel in place. 
b.	Slab plumbing. Water supply line and sewer lateral in slab foundation. 
c.	Slab Cover. Verify interior footings, gravel, vapor barrier, waterproofing where applicable. 
d.	Interior walls may not be covered until the following inspections are completed: 
1.	Framing. Structure at dry-in. 
2.	Electrical. Rough-in with neutral, ground, and service cable wired. 
3.	Mechanical. Rough-in complete with pressure test on gas lines. 
4.	Plumbing. Rough-in complete with pressure test on distribution lines. 
e.	Insulation. Air sealing, fire caulking, and energy conservation measures installed. 
f.	Permanent Power (Pre-final). All electrical applications installed and ready to be energized. 
g.	Final Inspection. Building is complete and ready to occupy. 
h.	Inspection of external improvements. 
1.	Sidewalk install as required by this code. 
2.	Street address numbers must be visible from the street. The size of the address numbers must be a minimum of 3 inches tall. 
(c)	Construction in flood hazard area. [Added 2-13-2006] Construction of a structure within a flood hazard area for which a permit has been issued shall be governed by the following: 
(1)	Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Building Inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. 
(2)	Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional engineer or architect. 
(3)	Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the development permit holder's risk. 
(4)	The Building Inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the development permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(d)	Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(1)	A Certificate of Occupancy must be issued prior to the occupancy or use of any new or newly renovated building or structure, in accordance with the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code. 
(2)	It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any part of a building, structure, or premises, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued stating that the building or structure or premises conforms to the requirements of the building codes and this Development Code. 
(3)	A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
a.	Occupancy and use of a building or structure constructed or enlarged. 
b.	Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
c.	Any change in use of a nonconforming use, lot or building. 
(4)	Permanent electric power may not be supplied to any structure until the power company is contacted by the Planning & Development Department. [Added 2-13-2006] 
(5)	A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained by the Building Official and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, §§ 5r—t, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 14-001, § (3), 1-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 1215. - Sign permitting and modifications. 
See the Sign Regulations Article of this Development Code for requirements and procedures for the issuance of sign permits and for modifications to the signage provisions. 
Sec. 1216. - Developments of regional impact. 
(a)	Types of approvals covered. The provisions of this Section apply to any type of governmental action requested by a private party related to a development project, such as a rezoning or special use approval, special exception variance or hardship variance approval, project approval, issuance of a development or building permit, or hook-up to a public utility. 
(b)	Thresholds for regional review. Any development project for which any governmental action is requested that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs for projects expected to have regional impact shall be considered a Development of Regional Impact (DRI): [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(c)	Submission to the regional development center. 
(1)	First request for project approval. Any Development of Regional Impact (DRI) shall be submitted by the Public Development Department on behalf of the applicant, after the applicant has attended a pre-submittal meeting with staff to present the proposal and fill out the application forms, to the North Georgia Regional Development Center (RDC) prior to submission of the first application for governmental action to the Public Development Department. Once the RDC has accepted the completed form, and has made an official determination that the project is a DRI (within 5 calendar days), the 30-day review period officially begins. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Subsequent requests for project approval. Once the development project has been reviewed by the RDC and the first governmental action has been granted, no further reviews by the RDC of subsequent governmental actions need to be reviewed by the RDC unless the project is significantly or substantially revised. 
(d)	Final Action by the County. Approval of the first request for governmental action by the County shall not be made on a Development of Regional Impact until either: 
(1)	A report has been received from the RDC reflecting its findings and recommendations, if any; or, 
(2)	Said report is not received within 30 days of official determination by the RDC that the project is a DRI. 
Sec. 1217. - Text amendments. 
This Development Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by the Board of Commissioners under the provisions of this Section. 
(a)	Initiation of text amendments. The Board of Commissioners or the Public Development Director may propose a proposed change to the text of this Development Code when public necessity, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Decision actions for Text Amendments. [Amended 2-13-2006] Before the Board of Commissioners may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall each hold a public hearing on the proposal as provided for in section 1219. After the public hearing the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners will be guided by the following: 
(1)	The Planning Commission shall have 40 days following its public hearing in which to make its recommendation. Failure to make a recommendation shall go forward to the Board of Commissioners as "no comment." 
(2)	Following its public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the text amendment at the next meeting scheduled for the purpose of considering zoning matters. 
(3)	In considering a text amendment, action shall be considered by vote of the members present. 
a.	A motion to approve or deny an amendment must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
b.	If a motion to approve an amendment fails, the amendment is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an amendment fails, another motion would be in order. 
c.	A tie vote on a motion for approval of an amendment shall be deemed a denial of the amendment. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
d.	If no action is taken on an amendment, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting. 
(4)	In taking final action on an amendment, the Board of Commissioners may: 
a.	Approve, approve with changes, or deny the proposal; or, 
b.	Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
c.	Return the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(c)	Standards for text amendments. The Board of Commissioners shall consider the following standards in considering any proposal that would result in a change to the text of this Development Code, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(1)	Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this Development Code as stated under Article 1? 
(2)	Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
(3)	Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
(4)	Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
(d)	Effect of text amendment approval. 
(1)	Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Board of Commissioners or upon the stated effective date thereof. 
(2)	For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code. 
(3)	Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the Grandfathered Development Article of this Development Code, as applicable. 
Sec. 1218. - Temporary suspension of permitting during rezoning. 
Upon initiation or submission of a valid application for a rezoning or special use permit on a property, or the initiation of a text amendment, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property that may be affected by the outcome of such application. 
Sec. 1219 - Procedure for Land Use Comprehensive Plan Amendments, Rezoning Approval, Special Use Approval, and Text Amendments. [Added 2/13/06] 
All public hearings to be held by the Board of Commissioners as required under Article 12 of the UDC will be held in accordance with the following procedures: 
(a)	Public hearing and notice. Before the Board of Commissioners may take final action on a proposed Comprehensive Plan Amendment, Rezoning Approval, Special Use Approval, or Text Amendments, the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall each hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
(1)	Public notice. 
a.	At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to each public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The notice, shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
b.	An amendment, other than a text amendment, initiated by an owner or their representative shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall post a sign or signs provided by the Public Development Department stating the date, time and place for the Planning Commission public hearing and the initially scheduled Board of Commissioners public hearing, and as appropriate to the requested action; 
a)	In addition to the requirements above, Comprehensive Plan amendment request shall include the present character area and future land use classifications and the nature of the proposed amendment; or 
b)	In addition to the requirements above, Rezoning amendment request shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property requested; or 
c)	In addition to the requirements above, Special Use requests shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed special use of the property; or 
One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the rezoning has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)	Public hearings; procedures. The public hearing held by the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners for a Comprehensive Plan amendment, rezoning, special use, or text amendment will be conducted in the following manner: 
a.	The Chair or an appointed designee, who will act as the Presiding Official, will convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
b.	The Presiding Official will call for each proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment, rezoning to be presented. 
c.	No person in attendance is to speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized is to state his or her name and home address. 
1.	The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of and opposition to the proposed amendment (giving equal time to both proponents and opponents). 
2.	No less than ten minutes is to be provided for all of those speaking in support of an amendment and no less than ten minutes is to be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. 
3.	If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at the public hearing. 
d.	The applicant will be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. The applicant may then be allowed time for rebuttal if adequate time remains. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
e.	During the public hearing, the members of the Planning Commission or the Board of Commissioners may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
( Ord. No. 10-13, 12-20-2010 ) 
ARTICLE 13. - APPEALS 

Sec. 1301. - Purpose of Article 13. 
This Article describes the process for addressing unusual situations or unique problems that may arise from the strict interpretation or enforcement of this Development Code, including appeals from an administrative decision, for a special exception, for unique hardships restricting reasonable use of a property, and for relief from flood damage prevention restrictions. 
Sec. 1302. - Appeals; general. 
(a)	Types of appeals. Persons may appeal to the Board of Adjustment for relief under the following circumstances: 
(1)	When aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of the Public Development Director or any other administrative official of the County made under this Development Code. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	When an exception is desired for a particular property from certain requirements of this Development Code, as specified in this Article. 
(3)	When compliance with the requirements of this Development Code would create a particular and unique hardship. 
(4)	When the requirements for flood damage prevention would create an exceptional hardship or adversely affect an historic structure. 
(b)	Initiation of appeals. 
(1)	All requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the Board of Adjustment, as provided in this Article. 
(2)	If denied, an application for a hardship variance or special exception variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
Sec. 1303. - Appeals of an administrative decision. 
(a)	Initiation of administrative appeal. 
(1)	Any person aggrieved by a decision may initiate appeals of an administrative action or interpretation to the Board of Adjustment. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the action or interpretation appealed from, by filing the appeal in writing with the Public Development Director. The Public Development Director shall transmit a notice of said appeal to the Board of Adjustment specifying the grounds thereof. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	It is the intention of this Code that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this code shall be presented first to the Director of the Public Development Department and that such question shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Public Development Director. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	The holder of or applicant for a development permit or a building permit may appeal any of the following actions taken by an administrative official: 
a.	The suspension, revocation, modification or approval with conditions of a development permit by the Director of Public Development Department upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or other approved plans. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
b.	The determination that the holder is in violation of development permit or building permit conditions. 
c.	The determination that the holder is in violation of any other provision of this Development Code. 
(b)	Action by Board of Adjustment. [Amended 2-13-2006] The Board of Adjustment, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the Public Development Director, shall: 
(1)	Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any person acting under authority of this Development Code, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this Development Code is alleged. 
(2)	Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this Development Code. 
(3)	Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
(4)	Interpret such other provisions of this Development Code as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
(c)	Temporary suspension of legal proceedings. An appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer or department head from whom the appeal is made certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which must be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)	Decision final. A decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be taken within 30 days of the decision of the Board of Adjustment. 
Sec. 1304. - Special exception variances. 
(a)	General limitations on relief. Special Exception Variances shall be limited to relief from the following requirements of this Development Code: 
(1)	Minimum building setbacks. 
(2)	Maximum building height. 
(3)	Minimum lot width. 
(4)	Minimum separation between agricultural and residential uses. 
(5)	Public street frontage. 
(6)	Buffers and screening. 
(7)	Signage, in accordance with a uniform sign plan. 
(8)	Minimum or maximum parking requirements. 
(b)	Standards for approval. A special exception variance may be granted upon a finding that the relief, if granted: 
(1)	Would not cause substantial detriment to the public good; and 
(2)	Would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity; and 
(3)	Would not diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; and 
(4)	Would not impair the purpose and intent of the Development Code; and 
(5)	Would not create an expectation of public facilities in the future. 
(c)	Administrative approval. 
(1)	Special exception variances shall be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless the variance is approved administratively. Only those variances listed in this Subsection, below, and within the parameters stated, may be considered for administrative approval. 
(2)	The Director of Public Development, upon a finding that a special exception variance meets the standards for approval contained in this Section, may administratively approve such special exception variance within and not exceeding the following parameters: 
a.	Minimum building setbacks, not to exceed a reduction in the minimum setback required by 25%. 
b.	Maximum building height, not to exceed an additional 4 feet above the maximum allowed. 
c.	Parking requirements, not to exceed a reduction from the minimum required by 10%, nor an increase in the maximum allowed by 10%. 
d.	Deviations of Standards, from the standards for a single-family or a manufactured home on a case by case basis, for the following items: 
1.	Roof pitch (no more than a 50% deviation). 
2.	Minimum width (no more than 3-foot deviation). 
(d)	Restriction on refiling if denied. If denied, an appeal for a special exception variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
(e)	Limitations on approval. In no case shall a special exception variance be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a property through a zoning change granted by the Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-003, 3-19-2012) 
Sec. 1305. - Hardship variances. 
(a)	Hardship variances; general. 
(1)	Relief from the application of the provisions of this Development Code may be granted by the Board of Adjustment upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
(2)	Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
(b)	Standards for approval. A hardship variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment that: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; or 
(2)	There are conditions that are peculiar to the property involved which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned; and 
(3)	The application of the Development Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(4)	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this Development Code, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this Code. 
(c)	Limitations on approval. In no case shall a hardship variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)	A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(2)	A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a rezoning granted by the Board of Commissioners. 
(3)	Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(4)	A use of land or buildings or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(5)	Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(d)	Restriction on refiling if denied. If denied, an appeal for a hardship variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
Sec. 1306. - Flood protection variances. 
(a)	Procedures. The Jackson County Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variances with regards to the requirements of Section 1105 of this Development Code or with decisions by the Director Public Development with regards to a flood area permit. The process for considering an application for a flood protection variance shall be the same as specified in Section 1307 of this Development Code. 
(b)	Criteria for approval of flood protection variances. The provisions of Section 1105 of this Development Code are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully in reviewing requests for variances. The Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and the following standards in considering whether or not to grant a flood protection variance. A variance shall be issued only when consistent with the following criteria and conditions: 
(1)	A finding of good and sufficient cause is made; 
(2)	A determination is made that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; 
(3)	A determination is made that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; 
(4)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood level during the base flood discharge would result; 
(5)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(6)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. In the instance of a Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(7)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this subsection and other applicable provisions Section 1105 of this Development Code are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(c)	Conditional approval permitted. Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection 1306(b) and the purposes of Section 1105 of this Development Code, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section and Section 1105 of this Development Code. 
(d)	Action following variance approval. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. The Public Development Department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request Process for granting an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 4a, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 1307. - Process for granting an appeal. 
(a)	Application and initial actions. 
(1)	Upon receiving a notice of an appeal, the Public Development Director shall assemble such memos, papers, plans, or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	An application for an appeal shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The Public Development Director may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(3)	Once the record has been assembled, the Public Development Director shall: 
a.	Review appeals from an administrative decision and special exception variances eligible for administrative approval for possible resolution or approval, respectively; and 
b.	Schedule unresolved appeals for consideration at the next meeting of the Board of Adjustment for which adequate public notice can be given. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	Public notice. 
(1)	At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(2)	A request for an unresolved special exception variance, a hardship variance or a flood damage prevention variance shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
a.	The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action; and 
b.	At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall post a sign or signs provided by the Public Development Department stating the date, time and place for the public hearing, the present zoning classification and the nature of the requested action, and shall send a letter by first class mail to the applicant or his attorney notifying the appellate of the date, time and place of the public hearing. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the subject property. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street at the location from which access will be gained to the property. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(c)	Withdrawal. Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal prior to the meeting of the Board of Adjustment shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the Public Development Director. The appeal shall thereupon be removed from the Board's agenda and the request shall have no further effect. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Board of Adjustment public hearing. 
(1)	The Chair or the Board of Adjustment's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)	The Presiding Official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(3)	The Public Development Director shall submit the assembled record of the appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The Public Development Director, or other appropriate party if the appeal was taken from an administrative action or interpretation, shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(4)	At the public hearing, the appellant may appear in person or may be represented by counsel. The following rules shall obtain in the conduct of the public hearing: 
a.	The presiding official shall conduct the public hearing informally, as strict adherence to the rules of evidence is not required. A goal is a fair hearing. 
b.	The appellant shall first present evidence to the Board. After the appellant has completed the presentation of evidence, opponents shall present such relevant evidence as they think appropriate after being recognized by the presiding official. 
c.	All parties participating in the public hearing shall introduce only relevant evidence. 
d.	All parties participating shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. 
e.	The appellant shall have an opportunity to present rebuttal evidence, but such evidence shall be limited to points or issues raised by the opponents. 
f.	The public hearing shall be tape recorded, either by videotape or by audiotape, in order to provide a verbatim record of the hearing. 
(5)	Within 30 days of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall provide a written decision with reasons supporting the decision. Such decision shall reflect the vote of the Board, as follows: 
a.	A motion to approve or deny an appeal must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
b.	If a motion to approve an appeal fails, the appeal is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal fails, another motion would be in order. 
c.	A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(6)	In taking action on an appeal, the Board of Adjustment may: 
a.	Approve, approve with changes, or deny the request; or 
b.	Table the appeal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
c.	Allow withdrawal of the appeal at the request of the appellant. 
Sec. 1308. - Temporary suspension of permitting during appeals. 
Upon submission of a valid application for the granting of an appeal on a property, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property that may be affected by the outcome of such application. 
ARTICLE 14. - GRANDFATHERED DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 1401. - Purpose of Article 14. 
This Article sets out the provisions that protect uses, structures, lots and signs that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this Code or a subsequent amendment, but no longer conform to the new regulations. The primary intent of the treatment of nonconformity is to allow continuation of these uses, structures, lots and signs until the end of their useful life, while encouraging conformance to the new regulations when it becomes reasonable. 
Sec. 1402. - Nonconforming development; in general. 
Lawful nonconforming uses, structures, lots and signs are declared by this Code to be incompatible with land uses, structures, lots and signs that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. However, such nonconforming development may be "grandfathered" and may continue under the circumstances presented in this Article for each type of development. 
Sec. 1403. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)	Nonconforming uses; defined. A nonconforming use is a use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the requirements of this Code. 
(b)	Grandfathered nonconforming uses. 
(1)	To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this Code or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this Code, except that the nonconforming use: 
a.	Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, or replaced with the same or another nonconforming use after its removal or discontinuance. 
b.	Shall not be re-established after damage exceeding 75% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction; provided that allowed reconstruction is to begin within 6 months after damage of 75% or less is incurred. 
c.	Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
d.	Shall not be extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Code and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(2)	If an existing use was lawfully established in a zoning district that is subsequently amended to require Special Use approval for such use, the existing use shall not be subject to the provisions of this subsection. 
(3)	Any intended but not yet existing nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the adoption of this Code or the adoption of an amendment to it shall be prohibited unless such intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired is actually commenced within one year of the adoption of this Code or the adoption of an amendment to it regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
Sec. 1404. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)	Nonconforming structures; defined. A nonconforming structure is a structure or building whose size, dimensions or location on a property were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more such requirements of this Code. 
(b)	Grandfathered nonconforming structures. 
(1)	A nonconforming structure may continue to be occupied and used, except that the nonconforming structure: 
a.	Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding 75% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction except in conformance with this Code; provided that allowed reconstruction is to begin within 6 months after damage of 75% or less is incurred. 
b.	Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
c.	Shall not be replaced after removal except in conformance with the provisions of Section 310(a) of this Code. 
(2)	The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any nonconforming structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
Sec. 1405. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)	Nonconforming lots; defined. A nonconforming lot is a lot of record whose area, frontage, width or other dimensions, or location were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Code, and which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(b)	Grandfathered nonconforming lots. 
(1)	Where the owner of a legal lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance does not own sufficient land to conform to the minimum lot size or lot width requirement of this Code, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that: 
a.	No further subdivision of the lot is allowed; 
b.	The building setback and other lot dimensions conform as closely as possible, given the size and shape of the lot, to the required dimensions of the zoning district; and 
c.	Access to a public street is provided directly or through an easement recorded prior to adoption of this Development Code. 
(2)	On a flag lot, landlocked lot or other lot where the minimum lot width cannot be achieved at the minimum front building setback line, the principal building shall be moved back to a location on the lot where the minimum lot width can be achieved. 
(c)	Unbuildable lots. If a legal nonconforming lot has inadequate area or an unusual shape such that an adequate buildable area cannot be established under the setback requirements of the zoning district, a building permit may be issued under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Administrative approval as a special exception may be granted for reductions in setback or lot width, up to 20% of the requirement; or 
(2)	Approval for construction is granted as a hardship variance by the Board of Adjustment. 
(d)	Combination of nonconforming lots; where required. If the owner of 2 or more adjoining lots, at least one of which is a nonconforming lot, decides to build on or sell off these lots, he must first combine said lots to comply with or more closely approximate the dimensional requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 1406. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Nonconforming signs; defined. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Article, and which by reason of such adoption fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Article. 
(b)	Grandfathered nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(1)	Shall not be moved or replaced except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)	Shall not be repaired, rebuilt, or altered after damage exceeding 75% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction except in conformance with this Code; provided that reconstruction begins within 6 months after damage of 75% or less is incurred. 
(3)	Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and well-maintained condition. 
(4)	These provisions shall not have the effect of excusing any violation of any other ordinance. Nor shall these provisions have the effect of permitting the continued existence of any unsafe sign or any sign that is not in a good state of repair. 
(c)	Temporary signs to be removed. 
(1)	Any nonconforming sign that is temporary in nature and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, such as a streamer or pennant, shall be removed within 30 days of becoming a nonconforming sign. 
(2)	Failure to remove such illegal sign or bring it into conformance following 30 days notice to the owner or occupant of the property by the Code Enforcement Officer shall authorize the County to institute enforcement procedures pursuant to this Code. 
(d)	Treatment of illegal signs. 
(1)	Illegal signs located within a public right-of-way or on public lands: 
a.	Signs located illegally within any public right-of-way or other public lands shall be removed immediately upon adoption of this Code. 
b.	The County Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, other county employee(s), (and/or private individuals, corporations and entities, if so authorized by the Board of Commissioners), shall be authorized to remove and dispose of nonconforming signs from public rights-of-way and other public lands with or without notice to and at the expense of the owner, builder or other parties responsible for placement of said sign. 
(2)	Illegal signs not located within a public right-of-way or on public lands: 
a.	A sign that was not lawfully existing under the County's regulations prior to adoption of this Article shall, within 30 days of adoption of this Article, either (a) be removed; or (b) be brought into conformance with all provisions of this Article. 
b.	Failure to remove such illegal sign or bring it into conformance following 30 days notice to the owner or occupant of the property by the Code Enforcement Officer shall authorize the County to institute enforcement procedures pursuant to this Code. 
(e)	Removal due to road improvements. If a nonconforming sign must be removed due to a county or state road improvement project, the Board of Commissioners may authorize the relocation of said sign even though the new location may not meet the setbacks, location and/or spacing or other provisions of this section. 
(f)	Continuing maintenance of nonconforming signs. 
(1)	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair nonconforming signs. 
(2)	No repairs other than minor maintenance and upkeep of nonconforming signs shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(3)	A nonconforming sign that has been declared by the County to be unsafe because of its physical condition shall not be repaired, rebuilt, or restored unless such repair or restoration will result in a sign that conforms to all applicable provisions of this Article. 
ARTICLE 15. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 1501. - Purpose of Article 15. 
This Article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this Development Code, including the responsibilities and procedures of the various enforcement officers in carrying out enforcement activities. 
Sec. 1502. - Schedules and fees. 
From time to time, the Board of Commissioners may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Development Code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review and hearing processes required by this Development Code. 
Sec. 1503. - Administrative roles. 
(a)	Public Development director. The Public Development Director is responsible for the receipt, review and processing of all applications for rezoning, special use approval, subdivision, site plan approval, text amendments, and appeals filed with the County. The Public Development Director serves as the Secretary to the Planning Commission. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(b)	County engineer. 
(1)	The County Engineer is responsible for the review of submittals related to the construction of development projects and the construction of streets, drainage facilities and other activities within public rights of way. 
(2)	The County Engineer is responsible for enforcement of all requirements and restrictions of this Development Code relating to the engineering design of subdivision improvements and development projects, the construction of streets and stormwater management systems, their continued maintenance and operation, and coordination of the installation of public utilities. 
(c)	Building official. As the issuing agent for all permits related to the use and occupancy of land and buildings, the Building Inspector is responsible for the proper construction of buildings and structures, the use or occupancy of land and buildings, and continuing conformance to the provisions of this Development Code after construction is complete and the property is occupied. 
(d)	County marshal. The County Marshal's Office provides support to the primary enforcement officers of the County through investigations and issuance of warnings and citations. 
Sec. 1504. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement officer. 
(1)	Representatives of the Public Development Department (including the Building Inspector), the County Engineer and the County Marshal's Office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be deemed necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this Development Code, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the County, the Georgia Soil & Water Conservation Commission, the Soil & Water Conservation District, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(b)	Citations. Any violation of this Development Code may be tried upon a citation issued by the County Marshal or any other authorized representative of the County pursuant to the provisions of this Development Code and State law. Without limitation, builders, developers, contractors, property owners, and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this Development Code. 
(c)	Land development activities. 
(1)	Periodic inspections. The Public Development Director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which development permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, Jackson County Planning and Development shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. [Amended 9-20-2004, Amended 2-13-2006] 
(2)	Notice of violation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with development permit conditions, or with any other provisions relating to land development activities of this Development Code, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person (which notice may consist of a stop-work order). The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Development Code and deemed to have forfeited any required performance bond if required to post one under the provisions of this Development Code. The County may call the performance bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(3)	Stop-work orders. 
A.	For the first violation of the provisions of this article, the Public Development Director or his designee shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Public Development Director or the issuing authority shall issue a Stop Work Order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining a development permit, the Public Development Director shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. For a second and each subsequent violation, the Public Development Director shall issue an immediate stop work order. All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
B.	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Planning and Development Director or by the director of EPD, or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have been properly designated, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Planning and Development Director or by the director of EPD, or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
(d)	Land use and other provisions. 
(1)	Inspection. If the Building Inspector finds that a provision of this Development Code is being violated relating to the use or occupancy of land or structures, lot standards, landscaping, buffers, tree conservation, parking, signage, flood damage prevention or any other standard or provision (other than land development activities as may be authorized by a development permit), or relating to a condition of approval established in connection with a grant of variance or zoning change, he shall notify the person responsible for such violation in writing (which notification may consist of an order to cease and desist the violation). The notification shall indicate the nature of the violation and order the action necessary to correct it. Upon continuing noncompliance, or initially in the case of an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the Building Inspector shall have authority to prosecute violations in court. 
(2)	Cease and desist orders. The Building Inspector shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal or relocation of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this Development Code. 
(e)	Removal of illegal signs. The Building Inspector may order the removal of any sign in violation of this Development Code by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit was issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply within 7 days after the County gives written notice of noncompliance. 
(1)	Procedure following removal order. An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within 10 days from the date that the notice was mailed. Such appeal shall be made to the Board of Commissioners. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal (or 30 days after the date any appeal becomes final), the Building Inspector is authorized to remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(2)	Removal without notice. 
a.	The Building Inspector or any other agent of the County having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this Development Code, without giving notice to any party, if: 
1.	Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
2.	Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
b.	Following such removal, the County may collect the costs as provided in the following section. 
(3)	Costs of removal. 
a.	Removal of any sign found in violation shall be without liability to the County, its officers, agents, and employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. 
b.	If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of a statement of removal costs, the Building Inspector shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the County Attorney. In the event the removed sign(s) remains unclaimed for more than one year from the date of impound, the sign(s) shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
c.	Costs of removal shall be charged in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, or at the actual cost to the County, whichever is more appropriate to the action taken. 
(f)	Referral to county marshal. Any violation alleged under this Development Code may be referred to the County Marshal's Office for investigation, citation and enforcement. 
Sec. 1505. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)	Violation a misdemeanor. Violation of any provision of this Development Code, including violation of conditions of approval established in connection with grants of variance or zoning changes, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Failure to obtain a development permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a development permit as prescribed in this Development Code without first obtaining said development permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the County. 
(c)	Civil monetary penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Code relating to land disturbing activities, permitting conditions or stop work order shall be liable for a civil penalty or fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, but in no event less than $300.00. There shall be a minimum penalty of $300.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and there shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided above. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this Code shall be payable to the County, shall commence on the date of issuance of any stop work order, cease and desist order or other notice of noncompliance and shall not be affected by the filing of any appeal; however, an appellant may, upon filing an appeal, post an appeal bond with the County in an amount equal to double the cost of any and all corrective work to be determined by the Public Development Director; further, any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this Article may, at the discretion of the County, be waived or reduced if, in the discretion of the County, the violator has taken sufficient and timely curative and corrective action. No inspections, certificate of occupancies, building permits or soil erosion permits will be granted to any person who has an outstanding fine for violating this Code. Any person who violates any provisions of this Code, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Code or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Public Development Director issued as provided in this Code shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
(d)	Alternative penalties. Any violation of this Code may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the County court of competent jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law as to penalties that can be assessed for violations of county laws, the court shall be authorized to impose monetary penalties for such violations in accordance with the maximum penalty provided by State law, but not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the County from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
Sec. 1506. - Liability. 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Code, nor the issuance of a permit, nor the compliance with provisions of this Code, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the County for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Code or the terms of the development permit. 
(3)	No provision of this Code shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved under such laws or pollute any waters of the State as defined by said Acts. 
ARTICLE 16. - GLOSSARY OF DEFINED TERMS 

Sec. 1601. - Purpose of Article 16. 
This Article is a glossary of all definitions specifically used in the text of this Development Code. 
Sec. 1602. - Interpretation. 
(1)	Words and phrases defined in this Development Code shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. 
(2)	While definitions are located throughout this Development Code in the Articles to which they most readily refer, all definitions are presented in this Glossary in alphabetical order as a convenience. However, if differences in wording occur between definitions of a term in another Article of this Code and in this Glossary, the definition contained within the other Article shall control. 
(3)	All definitions, regardless of location within an Article of this Code, apply equally to the use of such terms throughout the Code. 
(4)	Refer to the Adoption, Applicability and Interpretation Article of this Development Code regarding the use and meaning of words and phrases. 
Sec. 1603. - Definitions of land use categories. 
Land use categories referred to in this Development Code have the following meanings. The use of the term "property" relative to a land use category includes both developed and undeveloped properties, while the term "use" means a property that is developed, occupied or otherwise in operation under the land use category. 
Agricultural [means] a property used primarily for the cultivation of crops, dairying or the raising of livestock, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. Agricultural uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the category "Agricultural, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting." 
Commercial [means] a property occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the sale of goods; the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment or other commercial services; the management of a business enterprise; or the provision of temporary housing to the traveling public (such as a motel); or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purposes. Commercial uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the categories "Administrative and Professional Offices," "Commercial Services," "Arts, Entertainment and Recreation," and "Retail Trade." 
Industrial [means] a property occupied by one or more business establishment that are primarily engaged in the fabrication, manufacture or production of durable or nondurable goods, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. Industrial uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the categories "Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing" and "Transportation, Communications and Utilities." 
Multi-family residential [means] a property occupied primarily by one or more residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units, or a mobile home park, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purposes. Multi-family residential uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the category "Residential Uses" other than "Single-Family Detached" and "Single-Family Attached: Duplex." 
Public or institutional use [means] a property occupied by a nonprofit religious, recreational or philanthropic organization, club or institution. Public or community uses are all uses listed on Table 2.2 under the category "Public and Institutional Uses." 
Single- and two-family residential [means] a property occupied primarily by one or more single-family dwellings or duplex dwellings, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. Single and two-family residential uses are listed as "Single-Family Detached" and "Single-Family Attached: Duplex" on Table 2.2 under the category "Residential Uses." 
Sec. 1604. - Definitions; general. 
Access [means] a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Accessory Structure Setback Line [means] a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street, and an accessory structure. 
Accessory Use or Structure [means] a use or structure that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use. 
Addition (to an existing building) [means] any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter, load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Agricultural Activities [means]: 
(1)	Good-faith commercial production from the land or on the land of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products, but not including forestry products (see "Tree harvesting" below); and 
(2)	Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
Applicant [means] a property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the County for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Application [means] a petition for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of a property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Aquifer [means] any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Area of Shallow Flooding [means] a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, or where a clearly deemed channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. [Amended 2-13-2006] 
Area of Special Flood Hazard [means] the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
As-Built Survey Drawings [means] drawings specifying the dimensions, location, capacities, and operational capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Awning [means] a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning sign. See Building Sign. 
Banner [means] a sign other than an official or personal flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material, and usually containing a message or logo. 
Base flood [means] the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year flood). 
Basement [means] that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Berm [means] a mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
Best Management Practices (BMP's) [means] a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydrologic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Board [means] the Board of Natural Resources. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Breakaway Wall [means] a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Buffer [means] the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. [Amended 9-20-2004] [The term] "buffer" [means] an area of natural vegetation or man-made construction, which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
(1)	Natural Buffer [means] a visual screen created by vegetation of such density so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
(2)	Structural Buffer [means] a visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
Buildable Area of Lot [means] that portion of a lot bounded by and interior to the required rear, side and front building setback lines for a principal building. 
Building [means] any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building Code [means] the technical codes approved for enforcement or otherwise adopted or adopted as amended by the County under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, which regulate the construction of buildings and structures. 
Building Floor Area [means] the gross floor area of all heated spaces within a building. Heated floor area does not include garages, unheated basements, attic storage areas and partially unenclosed decks, patios or lanais. Gross floor area comprises the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features, exclusive of areas open and unobstructed to the sky. 
Building Height [means] the vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
Building sign [means] a sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)	Awning sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
(2)	Mansard sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
(3)	Marquee sign [means] any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the top of the marquee. 
(4)	Parapet sign [means] a sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
(5)	Projecting sign [means] a sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 8 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(6)	Roof sign [means] a sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
(7)	Under-canopy sign [means] a display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over private sidewalks. 
(8)	Wall (or façade) sign [means] a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the wall no more than 8 inches. 
(9)	Window sign [means] a sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 

Sign Types 
Caliper [means] the diameter of a proposed tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point 6 inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including 4-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Canopy [means] a permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. 
Changeable copy sign. 
(1)	Automatic changeable copy sign [means] a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
(2)	Manual changeable copy sign [means] a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
Commission [means] the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Common Open Space. See Open Space. 
Comprehensive Plan [means] the Comprehensive Plan for the County, prepared, adopted and as amended from time to time in accordance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Law. 
Condition of Zoning Approval [means] a requirement adopted by the Board of Commissioners at the time of approval of a rezoning or special use, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Development Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the rezoning or special use and to further the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Congregate Personal Care Home. See under Personal care home. 
Consumer fireworks: Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The term consumer fireworks shall not include: (1) Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term consumer fireworks include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and (2) Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Critical Root Zone [means] the minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The Critical Root Zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to one (1) times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. EXAMPLE: The CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 20 feet. 
Cul-de-sac [means] a "minor street" having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated with a paved turnaround. A cul-de-sac street shall have a length of no less than 125 feet, measured along the centerline of the street from the centerpoint of the cul-de-sac turnaround radius to the centerline of the street with which the cul-de-sac intersects. 
Cul-de-sac turnaround [means] a paved area terminating a cul-de-sac street, provided for the purpose of enabling vehicles to reverse direction while driving continuously in a forward but circular manner. For the purpose of this definition, the turnaround shall be considered to begin at that point where the street right-of-way begins, and continues, to widen in order to create the turnaround. 
Custom Service Restaurant. See under Restaurant, custom service. 
Cut [means] a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also know[n] as "excavation." 
Cutting [means] the removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Day Care Facility [means] the use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children or elderly adults who do not reside on the property, for periods of less than 24 hours. 
(1)	Day Care Center [means] a day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision and nonmedical care, 19 or more children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
(2)	Family Day Care Home [means] an accessory use within a private residence operated by the occupant of the dwelling that enrolls for pay, supervision and nonmedical care, 5 or fewer children or elderly adults with no overnight stays, or no more than 6 children or elderly adults if the structure meets the Building Code requirements for institutional uses. 
(3)	Group Day Care Home [means] a day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision and nonmedical care, up to 18 children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
Dead Plant or Tree [means] any living plant material that has lost 33% or more of its branches or leaves, as determined by the County, shall be considered dead. 
Developer [means] the person, corporation or other legal entity that undertakes the subdivision of property, the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity, or the construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property. 
Development [means]: 
(1)	A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; 
(2)	Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; 
(3)	The act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development Permit [means] the authorization necessary to initiate and conduct a land-disturbing activity and to carry out the planned development of land and structures. 
Development Site [means] that portion of a tract of land that will be dedicated to a proposed development, including the land containing trees that will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. 
DHR [means] the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Diameter Breast Height (DBH) [means] the diameter of an existing tree trunk measured at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
DNR [means] the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Double-faced sign [means] a sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. 
Drainage Structure [means] a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Drip Line [means] a perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Duplex [means] a two-family dwelling. See under Dwelling, Single-Family Attached: Duplex. 
Dwelling [means] a building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
(1)	Single-Family Detached Residence [means] a residential building, whether site-built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed for occupancy by one family. 

Dwelling, Single-Family Detached 
(2)	Single-Family Attached, Duplex [means] a residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(3)	Single-Family Attached, Townhome [means] a residential building in which the dwelling units may adjoin one another only at the vertical walls and no dwelling unit may be located above another. 

Dwelling, Townhouse 
(4)	Multi-Family [means] a residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other, such as in a garden apartment building. 

Dwelling, Garden Apartment 
Dwelling Unit [means] one or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment with complete provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing and personal hygiene, and physically set apart from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
Elevated Building [means] a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest elevated area elevated above the ground level by means of fill; solid foundation perimeter walls; pilings, columns, posts and piers, shear walls; or breakaway walls. 
EPD [means] the Georgia Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD Director [means] the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Erosion [means] the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan [means] a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Existing Construction [means] for the purposes of flood damage prevention requirements, any structure for which the start of construction commenced before adoption of the first flood damage prevention ordinance or regulation in the county. 
Family [means] an individual or two or more persons living together as a household. 
Family Day Care Home. See under Day care facility. 
Family Personal Care Home. See under Personal care home. 
Fast Food Restaurant. See Restaurant, fast food. 
Feedlot [means] any tract of land or structure, pen, or corral, wherein cattle, horses, sheep, goats, and swine are maintained in close quarters for the purpose of fattening such livestock for final shipment to market. [Added 2-13-2006] 
Fence [means] an artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, wire mesh, or decorative metal erected to enclose, screen or separate portions of a lot. 
Fill [means] a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling [means] the placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished Grade [means] the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Fireworks: Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term fireworks shall not include: (1) Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term fireworks include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and (2) Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Flood or Flooding [means] a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)	Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) [means] an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) [means] an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study [means] the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Flood Plain [means] any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway [means] the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor [means] the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles or storage, or the floor area of an attic used exclusively for storage. 
Floor Area, Building. See Building Floor Area. 
Floor Area, Gross. See Gross Floor Area. 
Flowering Trees [means] ornamental trees that are known for their blooms and generally mature at a height of less than 40 feet. Flowering trees approved for use include dogwood, redbud, crape myrtle, and ornamental cherry. Flowering trees not approved for use include Bradford Pear. 
Freestanding sign [means] a sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)	Pole sign [means] a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
(2)	Ground sign [means] a freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. Also referred to as a "monument sign." 
Grading [means] altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenway [means]: 
(1)	An area along the course of any river, stream, creek, branch, lake, reservoir, pond, drainage system, spring, well or other body of surface or subsurface water, whether natural or artificial to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. Greenways are established pursuant to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(2)	An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Gross Floor Area [means] the total area of all floors of a building, measured from the outside planes of the exterior walls. 
Ground Cover [means] a low growing plant, other than turf grass, which forms a continuous cover over the ground surface. 
Ground Elevation [means] the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Groundwater Recharge Area [means] the land area where the water that eventually seeps down into an aquifer first enters the ground. 
Group Day Care Home. See under Day care facility. 
Group Home for the Elderly. See Retirement community. 
Group Personal Care Home. See under Personal care home. 
Guest House [means] an accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the behest of the property residents for no fee or other consideration, and meeting or exceeding the Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings under this Code. 
Hardwood Tree [means] any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Heavily Landscaped Area [means] an area planted with a combination of shade and flowering trees, deciduous and evergreen shrubs, and flowering perennials such that the entire area is covered with landscape materials. The green space designated to be heavily landscaped shall have no more than 25% of its area covered in turf ((seed or sod). The remaining 75% shall contain shade trees (2 inch caliper minimum), flowering trees (1 inch caliper minimum), evergreen shrubs (3 gallon minimum), deciduous shrubs (3 gallon minimum), and perennials or nonturf groundcovers (2½ inch pot minimum). All plant materials shall be mulched. 
Highest Adjacent Grade [means] the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Home Occupation [means] any activity carried out for profit by the resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
(1)	Home Office [means] a home occupation that is limited to an office use and does not involve visits or access by the public, suppliers or customers, and does not involve the receipt, maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise at the home. 
(2)	Home Business [means] a home occupation that is limited to the office use of a practicing professional, an artist or a commercial representative, and may involve very limited visits or access by clients or customers, but does not involve the maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise received at the home. 
Household [means] an individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mutually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship, as contrasted to one in a transient relationship who pays for lodging such as a border. 
Illuminated signs. 
(1)	Internally illuminated sign [means] any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
(2)	Externally illuminated sign [means] any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Impermeable [means] something (such as a layer of rock) that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious Surface [means] a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface, such as a building, paved road or driveway, parking lot, deck, swimming pool or patio. 
Incidental sign [means] a small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than one square foot. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Industrialized Home [means] a dwelling manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1) [O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.] and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the State Building and Construction Codes and bear an insignia of Approval issued by the Commissioner. 
Jurisdiction [means] that area over which the governing body has authority for planning, zoning and development permitting under the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Lake [means] a body of water one acre or more in surface area, created either by a manmade or natural dam or other means of water impoundment. 
Land-Disturbing Activity [means] any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practices that are exempt under Section 1104(c) of this Code. 
Landscape Materials [means] any combination of living plant materials and nonliving materials such as rock, pebbles, sand, mulch, pavers, berms, fencing, walls, fountains and other decorative materials. 
Landscaping [means] landscaping shall consist of shrubs, vines, turf, ground cover and other landscape materials which are utilized to enhance the aesthetic and functional qualities of a site. 
Land Use Plan [means] an element of the Comprehensive Plan, which includes a Future Land Use Map. 
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale [means] a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this section, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Local Issuing Authority [means] the Jackson County Board of Commissioners or its assigned or designated representative, which shall be responsible for administering this Article and has been certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Lot [means] a parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
(1)	Corner Lot [means] any lot bounded by 2 streets at their intersection. 
(2)	Cul-de-sac lot [means] a lot having at least 50 percent of its lot frontage on a cul-de-sac turnaround, as measured along the street right-of-way line. The sidelines of a cul-de-sac lot must be perpendicular or radial to the street right-of-way lines in accordance with the Project Design Standards Article of this Code, and shall meet the frontage requirements of this Code. 
(3)	Double-Frontage Lot (i.e., a through lot) [means] a lot bounding on 2 or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot unless said corner lot has frontage on 3 or more sides. 
(4)	Interior Lot [means] a lot having frontage on only one street. 

Lot Area [means] the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot Line [means] the boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property. 
(1)	Front Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that abuts a public street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
(2)	Rear Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a public street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
(3)	Side Lot Line [means] any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a public street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 

Lot of Record [means] a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk to the Superior Court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot width [means] the distance from one sideline to the other sideline measured at the minimum front building line of the lot; provided, however that for a cul-de-sac lot, the distance shall be measured at the minimum front building line of the lot or the front line of the proposed or actual principal building located thereon, whichever is farther from the street right-of-way. 
Mansard [means] a steeply sloped, roof-like façade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia [means] a publication of the same name published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
Manufactured Home [means] a dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq.), which first became effective on June 15, 1976. The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirement and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Manufactured Home Park [means] any lot or parcel under single ownership on which 2 or more manufactured homes are to be located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
Manufactured Home Sales Lot [means] a premises on which manufactured homes are displayed for sale. 
Marquee [means] a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the façade of a building. 
Marquee sign. See under Building Sign. 
Mean Sea Level [means] the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the flood plain. For purposes of this Code, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Minimum front setback [means] the minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining street and the façade of a principal building on the property. 
Mobile Home [means] a dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Modular Home. See Industrialized Home. 
Monument sign. See Ground Sign under Freestanding Sign. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) [means] as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
Natural Ground Surface [means] the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) [means] numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extend of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New Construction [means] any structure for which the start of construction commenced after adoption of the first flood damage prevention ordinance or regulation in the county (June 19, 1986), and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New Manufactured Home Park of [or] Subdivision [means] a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after adoption of the first flood damage prevention ordinance or regulation in the county (June 19, 1986). 
One-Hundred-Year Flood Plain [means] a land area subject to a 1 percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Opaque [means] impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Open Space [means] an area of land or water that is permanently set aside through dedication, designation or reservation to remain in a natural and unimproved state or that may be improved only for active or passive recreation or enjoyment. 
(1)	Common Open Space [means] land or water areas within a development project that are available to or benefit all occupants of the development on a continuing and permanent basis, such as walking trails, community centers or clubhouses, golf courses and other recreation areas, protected flood plains or wetlands, and fishing or boating lakes. Common open space does not include any streets or public rights-of-way, or yard areas or landscape areas located on private property. 
(2)	Public Open Space [means] land reserved for preservation, leisure or recreational use but dedicated in fee simple to a governing body or agency to be responsible for operation and maintenance. Public open space may not be reserved for or dedicated to the exclusive use of the residents of a particular development. 
Operator [means] the party or parties that have: 
(A)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(B)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Outparcel [means] a lot deeded separately from a larger tract for individual development, but generally sharing access with the larger tract. Outparcels are most generally associated with shopping centers. 
Overstory Tree [means] any deciduous or evergreen tree that has the potential to grow to a mature height of 40 feet or more (Reference Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia, Cooperative Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625 or any similar publication.) Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
Owner [means] a person having or controlling a majority fee simple interest in a property, or their authorized representative. 
Parking Bay [means] three or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
Pennant [means] any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or an "official or personal flag" as regulated in this Article. 
Perennial Stream [means] a stream that flows throughout the whole year. Perennial streams may be identified as shown as such on a United States Geologic Service Quad map. 
Permit [means] the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Person [means] any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Personal Care Home [means] a dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service and one or more personal care services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
(1)	Family Personal Care Home [means] a personal care home in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, that offers care for 2 to 6 adults. 
(2)	Group Personal Care Home [means] a personal care home in a residence or other type of building that is noninstitutional in character and offers care for up to 15 adults. 
(3)	Congregate Personal Care Home [means] a personal care home that offers care to 16 or more adults. 
Personal Care Services [means] individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. 
Photovoltaic (PV) System: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use of semiconductor devices, called photovoltaic cells, that generate electricity whenever light strikes them. Included in a PV system are the solar energy generation mechanisms (e.g., panels or other assemblies of solar electric cells), inverters (devices that convert Direct Current electricity produced by the system to usable Alternating Current), batteries and battery systems that store electrical energy from the PV system for future use, meters, and electric transmission wires and conduits that facilitate connections with users and/or the local power grid. 
Planned center [means] a single office, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or permitted for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. [Added 2-13-2006] 
Plant Materials [means] living plants, such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, grasses and perennial flowering plants, turf, and vines that are suitable for ornamental and/or functional use. 
Pollution Susceptibility [means] the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in a recharge area. 
Pond [means] a body of standing water less than one acre in surface area, created either by a natural dam, or other means of water impoundment. 
Principal Building [means] a building in which is conducted a principal use. 
Principal Building Setback Line [means] a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot. 
(1)	Front Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. 
(2)	Rear Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along and parallel to the full length of the rear lot line. 
(3)	Side Building Setback [means] the minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along and parallel to the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 

Principal freestanding sign [means] the main or largest freestanding sign or signs on a property. 
Principal Use [means] the specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Professional Engineer [means] an engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the State of Georgia. 
Project [means] the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Project entrance sign [means] a permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance into a multi-family development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as but not limited to a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. 
Projecting sign. See under Building Sign. 
Property or Parcel of Land. See Lot. 
Protected River. A "protected river" is any perennial river or watercourse that has an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by the State. In Jackson County, protected rivers are the North Oconee River, the Middle Oconee River, and the Mulberry River. 
Protected Zone [means] all lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of the parcel required to remain in open space, and all designated buffers or tree save areas, and other areas as may be established by conditions of zoning approval. 
Public Improvement [means] the construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the public, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Public Open Space. See under Open Space. 
Qualified Personnel [means] any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. [Amended 9-20-2004] 
Recharge Area [means] any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Recreational Vehicle [means] a motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, motor home, or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
Recreational Vehicle Dealer [means] the use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used recreational vehicles, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Registered Land Surveyor [means] a land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the State of Georgia. 
Replacement Tree [means] a new Tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements (regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development). 
Residential Business. See Home business under Home occupation. 
Restaurant, Custom Service [means] an establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas, as contrasted to a fast food restaurant. 
Restaurant, Family [means] a Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to sit-down service, occasionally with take-out service but no drive-in or drive-through facilities, and having an average turnover rate generally of less than 1 hour. Family restaurants are usually moderately priced and frequently belong to chains such as Denny's, Pizza Hut and Shoney's. 
Restaurant, Fast Food [means] any establishment, building or structure where food or drink are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise permitted restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where drive-through or take-out service is provided incidental to a Custom Service Restaurant. 
Restaurant, Quality [means] a Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to fine dining and often associated with a particular cuisine. Quality restaurants are characterized by table settings of better silverware, china, glassware and cloth tablecloths, and have average turnover rates generally of 1 hour or more. 
Retirement Community [means] an age-restricted residential development that offers significant services and facilities for the elderly, including social and recreational activities, personal care services, or health facilities limited to use by the development's residents. At least 80% of the units must be occupied by residents 62 years old or older, and the remaining units must be occupied by at least one resident 55 years old or older. 
River Bank [means] the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Roadway, controlled access [means] a state or federal highway (usually median divided) that, by design, may only be accessed from: 
(1)	Public streets where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit; or 
(2)	Public streets where such access is provided at grade level intersections which are designed and permitted by the Georgia DOT as part of the highway construction project; or 
(3)	Right in/right out only private drives without median cuts and where such private drives are permitted by the Georgia DOT due to extenuating circumstances such as no other means of access. 
Controlled access roadways are distinguished from other state and federal roads in that the private driveway access is the exception to the rule rather than the norm. This definition does not include "limited access roadways." 
Roadway Drainage Structure [means] a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roadway, limited access, [means] a median divided state or federal highway which, by design, may only be accessed from public streets and where such access is provided by grade separated interchanges consisting of bridge(s) and ramps so that traffic entering and exiting said highway can safely merge into and exit from the highway at the posted speed limit (an example would be an interstate highway). This definition does not include "controlled access roadways." 
Roof sign. See under Building Sign. 
Screen [means] natural vegetation or a decorative structure that creates an opaque visual block or obscures an unattractive view. Screening may consist of any combination of the following, as approved by the Director: 
(1)	Fencing constructed of cedar, redwood, treated wood, or other suitable all-weather material. 
(2)	Masonry walls. 
(3)	Plant materials or natural vegetation. 
(4)	Earthen berms. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, a screen is opaque to a height of 6 feet above the ground surface or, for a screen of plant materials, has the maximum opacity obtainable with the approved arrangement and species of plant materials, to a height of 6 feet. 
Sediment [means] solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation [means] the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Sensitive Natural Area [means] any area, as identified now or hereafter by DNR, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)	Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)	Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)	Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)	Other areas so designated by DNR, and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Setback [means] the shortest straight-line distance between a street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection therefrom (excluding roof overhangs of 18 inches or less), measured at 90 degrees to the street or lot line. 
Setback, Minimum, [means] the shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way line or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
Sexually-Oriented Adult Use [means] any establishment that, as a regular and substantial business purpose, offers services, live performances or materials in print or in any photographic or recorded media that involves sexually-oriented activities or depicts sexually-oriented anatomical areas, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or gratification to the customer. Such uses include but are not limited to: an adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult video store, lingerie modeling, erotic dance establishment, and an escort bureau. 
(1)	Sexually-Oriented Anatomical Area [means] uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, vulva or anus; female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple; or male genitals in a discernable erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)	Sexually-Oriented Activity [means] actual or simulated act of masturbation, sodomy or sexual intercourse; physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breasts; or any sadomachistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
Shade Tree [means] a broadleaf deciduous tree having an average height at maturity of a least 40 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Shopping Center. See Planned center. 
Shrub [means] a self-supporting woody plant that normally reaches a height of less than 15 feet. 
Sign [means] any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
Sign face [means] that portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign module [means] each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
Sign structure [means] all elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Single-Family Detached Residence. See under Dwelling. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan [means] an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Softwood Tree [means] any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Solar Array: A number of photovoltaic modules or panels that generate solar electricity, assembled or connected together to provide a single electrical output. 
Solar Array, Tracking: A solar array that follows the path of the sun to optimize the amount of solar radiation received by the device. A tracking solar array may be ground mounted or building mounted. 
Solar Access Easement: A recorded easement, the purpose of which is to secure the right to receive sunlight across real property of another for continued access to sunlight necessary to operate a solar energy system. 
Solar Energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector or solar energy system. 
Solar Energy Facility: The area of land devoted to solar energy system installation. A solar energy facility may include an interconnection with the local utility power grid for distribution to more than one property or consumer in the electricity market as a commercial venture. Includes the term "solar farm." 
Solar Energy System: The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The term applies, but is not limited to, photovoltaic (solar electric) systems and thermal solar energy systems. 
Solar Energy System, Building Mounted: A solar energy system, which may include solar thermal panels, solar hot water system panels, and photovoltaic panels, which are mounted to a building or structure, to provide energy primarily for on-site use. Building-mounted solar panels may be flush-mounted (i.e., flush to the surface of a building roof or building façade in a manner that the panel cannot be angled or raised), or as one or more modules fixed to frames which can be tilted or automatically adjusted at an optimal angle for sun exposure. A mounted solar energy system is accessory to the building or structure. 
Solar Energy System, Ground Mounted: A solar energy system that is directly installed on (mounted to) the ground and is not attached or affixed to any structure. 
Solar Energy System, Thermal: A solar energy system that directly heats water or other liquid using sunlight, including the use of heated liquid for such purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating pool water. 
Solar Farm: A solar energy facility, typically with multiple solar arrays, designed and used for the purpose of generating electric energy via a photovoltaic system. 
Specimen Tree [means] any tree that meets all of the following criteria due to its size and condition: 
(1)	Size Criteria. 
a.	Overstory hardwoods: 20-inch diameter or larger. 
b.	Overstory softwoods: 30-inch diameter or larger. 
c.	Understory trees (see Definitions): 8-inch diameter or larger. 
(2)	Condition Criteria. 
a.	Life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
b.	Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
c.	No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
d.	No major insect or pathological problem. 
Stabilization [means] the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of Construction [means] the initiation of new construction or a substantial improvement, as follows: 
(1)	For New Construction [means] the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt.) 
(2)	For a Substantial Improvement [means] the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural parts of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State General Permit [means] the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). [Amended 9-20-2004] 
State Waters [means] any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures [means] measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Subdivision [means]: 
(1)	The division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; 
(2)	A land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
Substantial Damage [means] damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement [means] any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building prior to improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)	The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of the actual repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified through enforcement of this Development Code and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Surface Mining [means] any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores, and dimension stone, and other solid matter for sale or for processing or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. 
Temporary event [means] an activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events include but are not limited to such activities as: 
(1)	The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent; 
(2)	An election, political campaign, referendum, or ballot proposition put to the voters as part of city, county, state, or federal governance; 
(3)	Special business promotions, such as but not limited to "grand openings," "close-out sales," carnivals and seasonal sales events; 
(4)	A yard sale; 
(5)	The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling, or renovation of a building; or 
(6)	A special event by a nonprofit organization, such as a community fair or religious assembly. 
Tenant [means] a natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Townhouse. See under Dwelling. 
Travel Trailer. See Recreational vehicle. 
Tree [means] any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least 2 inches and a height of at least 10 feet, and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree Harvesting [means] the planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular agricultural practice on a tract of land; not including the removal of trees for purposes of development or the removal of trees without replanting. 
Tree Save Area [means] all areas designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving specimen trees, or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree Unit Value [means] a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. Tree unit values relate to the size of the tree trunk (diameter or caliper). One tree unit is not equivalent to one tree. 
Trout Streams [means] all streams or portions of streams as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
(1)	Primary Trout Waters [means] streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
(2)	Secondary Trout Waters [means] streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
(3)	First Order Trout Waters [means] streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Turf [means] ground cover composed of one or more species of perennial grass that is grown as a permanent lawn. 
Two-Family Dwelling. See under Dwelling. 
Under-canopy sign. See under Building Sign. 
Understory Tree [means] any deciduous or evergreen tree that has the potential to grow to a mat ure height of less than 40 feet (Reference Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia, Cooperative Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625 or any similar publication.) Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
Use [means] the purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed or arranged, or for which it is occupied. See also "Principal Use" and "Accessory Use or Structure." 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures [means] measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicular sign [means] any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public rights-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)	Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
(2)	When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or 
(3)	When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Wall sign. See under Building Sign. 
Water Quality Critical Area [means] the Water Quality Critical Area shall comprise all lands within the Water Supply Watershed District. 
Water Supply Reservoir [means] a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned drinking water systems. This definition specifically excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water Supply Watershed [means] the area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Watercourse [means] any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands [means] freshwater areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetlands, Protected [means] those wetlands identified on the National Wetlands Inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or otherwise approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based on competent studies prepared by a registered and qualified professional engineer. 
Window Sign. See under Building Sign. 
Yard [means] an area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
(1)	Front Yard [means] a yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(2)	Rear Yard [means] a yard situated along a rear lot line. 
(3)	Side Yard [means] a yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 

Zoning Change [means] an amendment to the Zoning Map (rezoning), approval of a special use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special use. 
( Ord. No. 15-002, § 1, 3-16-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-006, § 2, 7-20-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-001 , § 4, 1-18-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 2005 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2005 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 2005 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES/RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2005 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 2005 Code. Ordinances adopted since 2005, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 