THE CODE OF THE CITY OF GREENVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 1, 2013 

> 
____________ 
James C. Bray 
Mayor 
____________ 
Josephine Mahone-Stargell 
Jo Ann Humphries 
Charlene R. Glover 
Mike Plant 
City Council 
____________ 
Theodore P. Meeker, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Everlene W. Brooks 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Charlene R. Glover 
Mayor 
____________ 
Josephine Mahone-Stargell 
Darryl Ogletree 
Calvin A. Dickerson 
Virginia L. Hill 
City Council 
____________ 
Theodore P. Meeker, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Everlene W. Brooks 
City Clerk 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code, as updated with ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and City Council through November 13, 2012. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Everlene Brooks, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Greenville, Georgia, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenville, Georgia. 2013. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE  ORDINANCE NO. 2013-003 
An ordinance adopting and enacting a new code for the Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia; providing for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein; providing a penalty for the violation thereof; providing for the manner of amending such code; and providing when such code and this ordinance shall become effective. 
Be it ordained by the: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 30, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 6, 2013, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 6, 2013, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective October 1, 2013. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and City Council this 1st day of October, 2013. 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Mayor and City Council, held on the 1st day of October, 2013. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of these Revised Ordinances to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of these Revised Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide a new Charter for the City of Greenville, Georgia; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city treasurer, and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges and all officers thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to a provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's Charter as enacted by 2011 Ga. Laws (Act No. 140), p. 3868. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Greenville in Meriwether County is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Greenville." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Greenville. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Greenville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(32)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(33)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(34)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(35)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(36)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(37)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(38)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(39)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(40)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the city clerk that such person desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file the written notice within the time provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of this city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Greenville shall consist of one election district with four numbered posts. Each person seeking election shall designate the post for which he or she seeks election. 
(e)  On the first Tuesday in November 2011, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmembers. Then, on the first Tuesday in November 2013, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected two councilmembers. It is the purpose of this section to provide a rotation system for the office of mayor and councilmembers. The terms of the offices shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  (1)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, that if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this chapter. 
(f)  No person holding elective office may be employed by the city in any position, either as an employee or as an independent contractor, until the expiration of 90 days after the end of his or her term. 
Sec. 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating Section 2.16 or any other express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Meriwether County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Meriwether County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Greenville. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." Such oath may be modified as required by Georgia law. 
(b)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call by the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 3.14. - Rules of procedure; journal. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 3.15. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 3.16. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced orally or in writing. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed, unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to the code of ordinances for the City of Greenville. The enacting clause shall be "IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GREENVILLE, GEORGIA AND BY THE AUTHORITY THEREOF" and every ordinance shall so begin. Any ordinances introduced orally shall be reduced to writing after adoption. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; all ordinances may be adopted on the date that they are introduced. Upon adoption of any ordinance, the city clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.19. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.16 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 3.20 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(d)  Any ordinance adopted by the City Council shall be codified in accordance with Georgia laws. 
Sec. 3.21. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Sec. 3.22. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove, with confirmation of appointment or removal by the city council, all officers, department heads, and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this Charter. All officers, department heads, and employees shall serve at will at the pleasure of the mayor and city council; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in Section 3.13 of this Charter; 
(7)  Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(8)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(9)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in Section 3.23 of this Charter; 
(10)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(11)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(12)  Perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this Charter, or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.23. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented by the city clerk to the mayor within three days after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor shall within ten days of receipt of an ordinance return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval, or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law on the 15th day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting, and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of the entire city council, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
Sec. 3.24. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The mayor pro tempore shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. All appointed officers and employees hired or appointed shall serve at will, at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the director's department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under the mayor's supervision, but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of three councilmembers. 
Sec. 4.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. All members shall serve at will at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of the office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 4.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position of city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and shall not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor and will not be provided employee benefits and will receive a Form 1099 for tax purposes. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
Sec. 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city clerk and city treasurer may be one and the same. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk or city clerk-treasurer. 
Sec. 4.14. - City treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the treasurer. The city treasurer and city clerk may be one and the same. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Greenville. All officers appointed to the municipal court shall serve at will at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 5.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Meriwether County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15. - Rules for court. 
(a)  With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(b)  The city council may by ordinance provide for the appointment of a clerk of the municipal court. The duties and compensation for the clerk of court shall be fixed by ordinance. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rates; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation that transacts business in this city or that practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  After the conducting of a budget hearing, the city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than July 1 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with any recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.18 of this Charter. 
(b)  After conducting a public hearing, the city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than July 1 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by any recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. The city council shall provide for a period of time, not more than 180 days, in which all ordinances shall be reviewed, readopted, amended, or repealed so that a codification is accomplished. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or case shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction, definitions, and severability. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconditional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.15. - Effect of repealers. 
(a)  The repeals provided for in Sections 7.16 and 7.17 of this Charter shall not affect any: 
(1)  Offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Act; 
(2)  Ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city; 
(3)  Evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Rights or franchise granted by any ordinances or resolution of the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(5)  Ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Present annual appropriation of the city; 
(7)  Ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees, or taxes now due or accrued; or 
(8)  Zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto. 
(b)  This repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this Act. 
Sec. 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Greenville approved February 22, 1967 (Ga. L. 1967, p. 2011 [1967 Ga. Laws, p. 2011]), and all amendatory acts thereto, are repealed. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The general ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Greenville City Code" or the "City Code." 
(Code 1991, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and city council: 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. Every word in any Code provision or ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Singular and plural. Every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future when applicable. 
(Code 1991, § 1-102) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the mayor and city council or the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Meriwether, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the City Court of the city. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
Judge of the City Court. The term "judge" or "Judge of the City Court" means the Judge of the City Court of Greenville, Georgia. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and city council of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
Misdemeanor. The term "misdemeanor" means a violation of the state criminal law punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00 or confinement in a county or other jail for a term not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," "town," or "municipal corporation." 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the term "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every specie or property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a special or temporary character. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Town. See Municipality. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days. 
Writing or written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1991, § 1-103) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-4. - Section headings; history notes and reference notes. 
(a)  The underlined headings of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1991, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code sections. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 1991, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(e)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(g)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
(Code 1991, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 1-107) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Conflicts. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any provision of this Code are hereby repealed, and this Code shall remain in effect until amended or repealed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances and amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"That section _____ of The Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______" (set out new provisions in full). 
(c)  When the mayor and city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the mayor and city council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section _____. It is the intention of the mayor and city council, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of The Code of the City of Greenville, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1991, §§ 1-109—1-111) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in § 1-6. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-14. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-16. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless included in this Code or later superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any specific rezoning ordinance or amendments thereto; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the mayor and city council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-2. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. Public officials and employees of the city shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such official and employee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(2)  Requesting, using, or permitting the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
(3)  Participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving his financial or personal interest; 
(4)  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the city, unless he has made full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services; 
(5)  Appearing on behalf of any private person, other than himself, before any public body in the city; 
(6)  Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be offered or given to him if he were not an official or employee; 
(7)  Disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the governing body; 
(8)  Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or any other person; or 
(9)  Appointing or voting for the appointment of any person related to him by blood or marriage to fill an office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages, pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(b)  Hearings and determinations. Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which if true would constitute a violation of this section, the city council shall conduct a public hearing at which the accused shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either personally or through counsel. (At the conclusion based thereon, the city council shall make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct of the official or employee in question.) 
(Code 1991, § 3-102) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officials and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor, such new practices as appear to be benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the mayor; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the mayor, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Interdepartmental cooperation. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(d)  Records. All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service herein below prescribed. 
(e)  Operation of administrative services. All units in the administrative services shall: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. 
(2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the city in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1991, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-4. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by the Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States of America, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Greenville; that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________ during my continuance therein, so help me God. 
(Code 1991, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-5. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provide by law, the mayor and city council may require any department head, city official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the mayor and city council. Said bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of said duties and to secure gains to corruption, malfeasance, misappropriation, or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the mayor and city council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-6. - Compensation. 
Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1991, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-7. - Compensation of mayor and city councilmembers; reimbursement of expenses. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive $7,200.00 annually which shall be paid to the mayor in 12 equal monthly installments. This compensation is subject to all federal, state, and local taxes. 
(b)  The councilmembers shall receive $1,200.00 annually which shall be paid to each councilmember in two equal semi-annual installments. This compensation is subject to all federal, state, and local taxes. 
(c)  The mayor and city councilmembers are entitled to reimbursement for all expenses incurred in the exercise of their responsibilities on behalf of the city. The mayor and city councilmembers shall follow the procedures established by the city for all city employees for reimbursements. 
(Code 1991, § 3-107; Ord. of 8-2-2011(1), § 3-107) 
Secs. 2-8—2-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-33. - Meetings. 
(a)  When held. The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the city council; provided that the mayor may convene the city council whenever in his opinion the public business requires it, and he shall do so upon the application of two members of the city council. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of regular meetings shall be available to the general public by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to such meeting and a notice containing the time, place, and date shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the mayor and city council. Notice shall be given to each city councilmember individually by the city clerk. Whenever any meeting required to be open to the public is to be held at a time and place other than at the time and place prescribed for regular meetings, the mayor and city council shall post a written notice for at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting by giving written or oral notice to the legal organ of the county. When special circumstances occur, and are so declared by the mayor and city council, a meeting may be held with less than 24 hours notice upon giving such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances including notice to said legal organ. 
(c)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1991, § 3-204) 
Sec. 2-34. - Standing committees. 
The city council is authorized to create standing committees as necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 3-205) 
Sec. 2-35. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, Roberts' Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the conduct of city council meetings. 
(1)  Call to order. All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special, or called meeting, and shall immediately call the city council to order. 
(2)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk or his deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(3)  Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the city council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the city council and an affirmative vote of a majority of such number shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business except that for which a larger vote has been mandated by this Code. 
(4)  Order of business. The business of the city council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
a.  Call to order. 
b.  Invocation. 
c.  Pledge of Allegiance. 
d.  Roll call. 
e.  Approval of agenda. 
f.  Approval of minutes. 
g.  Old business. 
h.  New business. 
i.  1.  Approval and/or questions from council concerning departmental monthly reports. 
2.  Discussion and/or approval of the sewer rate increase. 
j.  Report from standing committees. 
k.  Comments. 
l.  Executive session, if necessary. 
m.  Adjournment. 
(5)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a city council meeting is requested by a member of the city council, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(6)  Reports by committees. 
a.  Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city council or any member of the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. 
b.  Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations from time to time as may be necessary. 
(7)  Manner of addressing council. No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(8)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of city council who desires to address the city council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, and then shall step up in front of the rail, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the city council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to ten minutes, unless additional time is granted by the city council. 
(9)  Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner: 
a.  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the city council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
b.  Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before presentation to the city council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter would devolve and be approved by said department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given, then the same shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld. In the event the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the city council and give the reason advanced by the department head for withholding approval. 
c.  Introduction and adoption. 
1.  Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced in writing. 
2.  All ordinances may be adopted on the date that they are introduced. 
3.  No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed on its title, and no ordinance, or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
4.  An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole city council. For the purposes of tallying such vote, an abstention shall be deemed a vote in opposition to the motion. 
d.  Effective date. No ordinance shall take effect until five days after the date of its publication, except that an ordinance passed by a majority plus one of the whole membership of the city council, designated therein as a public emergency ordinance necessary for the protection of public health, public safety, public property, or the public peace, may be made effective upon adoption. 
(10)  Recording vote. Whenever any member shall request it, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on any questions taken. 
(11)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Roberts' Rules of Order, New Revised, for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(12)  Elections. All elections by the city council shall be by ballot, and a majority vote of the whole city council shall be necessary to an election. 
(13)  Open meetings and executive session. All meetings shall be open to the public in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 unless the material to be discussed is privileged under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-2 or is excluded from O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 by an exception under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. The city council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by the councilmember, meet in executive session. Attendance at such session shall be limited to the mayor and members of the city council and such invitees as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the mayor and city council. When any meeting is closed, the city council shall follow the guidelines established under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4, entering the reason for closure in the minutes. Said meetings shall only be closed after a majority of councilmembers present have voted to close the meeting. 
(Code 1991, § 3-206; Ord. of 10-7-2008(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-36. - Legislative function. 
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city in the manner set forth in this chapter; provided that the same is not in conflict with the Charter of the city, the Constitution or laws of the state, or the Constitution or laws of the United States of America. 
(Code 1991, § 3-207) 
Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-61. - General authority. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties. 
(Code 1991, § 3-301) 
Sec. 2-62. - Duties. 
The mayor shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Presiding at meetings. To preside at all meetings of the city council, but the mayor shall not be allowed to vote at such meetings except in the case of a tie vote by the city council on any question. 
(2)  Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting each year, or as soon thereafter as expedient, standing committees for that year; but the mayor may at any time alter the committees and make such changes as the interest of the city may require. 
(3)  Appointment of officers and employees. To appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers and employees of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. 
(4)  Dismissal, suspension, and discipline of officers and employees. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under the mayor's supervision, but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of three councilmembers. For the purposes of this section "cause" shall be construed to mean: 
a.  Negligence or inefficiency in performing the duties of the position held; 
b.  Unfitness to perform assigned duties; 
c.  Insubordination; 
d.  Misconduct; 
e.  Conduct reflecting discredit on the department; 
f.  Failure to report for work without justifiable cause; 
g.  Chronic absenteeism; or 
h.  Political activity in violation of municipal regulations. 
(5)  Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds, and bonds of the city duly authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 3-302) 
Sec. 2-63. - Powers. 
The mayor shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Rule making. To prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whomever prescribed, subject to the city council's power to amend or repeal. 
(2)  Investigation. To investigate and to examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the city council to aid in such investigations, examinations, or inquiries. 
(3)  Overriding. To set aside any action taken by a department head and to supersede him in the functions of his office. 
(4)  Delegation. To direct any department to perform the work for any other department, and to authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person. 
(5)  Veto power. To veto any ordinance, resolution, or order of the city council and the same shall not become law until subsequently passed over his veto by a unanimous vote of the city council. 
(6)  Spending. To authorize expenditures under circumstances when it is unreasonable to call a city council meeting. Such expenditures shall be subject to city council approved at the next city council meeting. 
(Code 1991, § 3-303) 
Sec. 2-64. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the city council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. 
(Code 1991, § 3-305) 
Secs. 2-65—2-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY CLERK/TREASURER 

Sec. 2-87. - Duties as city clerk. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall have the following duties in his capacity as city clerk: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of city council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose; 
(3)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and city council at the meeting of the city council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(4)  To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the city council; 
(5)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; and 
(6)  To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. 
(Code 1991, § 3-401) 
Sec. 2-88. - Duties as city treasurer. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall have the following duties in his capacity as city treasurer: 
(1)  To receive all money due the city council, including taxes, and pay out the same only upon orders passed by the city council and signed by the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore; 
(2)  To keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and the source and disposition thereof, which book shall be open for inspection by the public and city councilmembers; 
(3)  To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance; and 
(4)  To furnish the city council with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter. 
(Code 1991, § 3-402) 
Sec. 2-89. - Filling position. 
The mayor and city council shall hire a city clerk/treasurer as a vacancy occurs. Employment shall continue for such time and in such manner as is mutually agreeable. 
(Code 1991, § 3-403) 
Secs. 2-90—2-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-107. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 3-503) 
Sec. 2-108. - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall submit to the city council a bill for his services according to an intermittent schedule as established by the city council from time to time, itemizing the type of work performed by the city and the number of hours engaged in each type of work during the period. 
(Code 1991, § 3-504) 
Secs. 2-109—2-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-130. - Police department. 
(a)  Composition. The police department shall consist of the police chief and such other officers and personnel as the mayor and city council shall prescribe. 
(b)  Rank. Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, and the police officers, in order of seniority in each group. 
(c)  Police chief. 
(1)  Appointment and powers. The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and city council. in the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(2)  Duties. The police chief shall have the following duties: 
a.  To attend all meetings of the city council and all trials before the city court; 
b.  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city council; 
c.  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the city court; 
d.  To see that the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and all stature applicable therein are faithfully enforced; 
e.  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof; 
f.  To protect the rights of persons and property; 
g.  To oversee the conduct of the officers and men of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; 
h.  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all questions, activities, and investigations; 
i.  To submit a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officers; 
j.  To submit monthly to the Georgia Department of Public Safety the "Uniform Crime Report" prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 35-3-36 (Duties of criminal justice agencies); and 
k.  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor or city council. 
(3)  Resignation, removal, death, or disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
(d)  Police officers. 
(1)  Qualifications. Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall meet the guidelines and training prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
(2)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. 
(e)  Arrests. Police officers of the city may make arrests for violations of municipal ordinances and state laws when such violations are committed in their presence or when they have obtained a valid arrest warrant from the judge of the city court or from some other proper authority. In exercising such power of arrest, all police officers shall see that all necessary warnings are given to the accused as required by law. 
(f)  Disposition of stolen, abandoned, or impounded property. All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where said property has stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held and disposed of according to the "Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act" (O.C.G.A. §44-12-190 et seq.). 
(Code 1991, § 3-601) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9. 
Sec. 2-131. - Fire department. 
(a)  Composition. The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Rank. Following the fire chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, and the firefighters, in order of seniority in each group. 
(c)  Fire chief. 
(1)  Appointment. The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the fire department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Powers and duties. The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall have the following duties: 
a.  To see to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
b.  To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by the mayor and city council; 
c.  To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
d.  To submit a monthly written report to the mayor and city council on the activities of the department; 
e.  To establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the fire department, subject of approval by the city council; 
f.  To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city limits. 
(3)  Resignation, removal, death, or disability. In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
(d)  Obstructing firefighting apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire department in the performance of their duties. 
(e)  Obstructing fire plugs. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire plug so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. 
(f)  Command at fires. In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
(g)  Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
(h)  False alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, give, send or turn in, in any manner or way whatsoever, a false fire alarm or riot alarm, knowing the same to be false. 
(i)  Use of equipment outside city limits. Upon the orders of the fire chief or the mayor, members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires or rendering aid to other fire departments, or for rendering and in the case of accidents. Persons who reside outside the city limits and desire fire protection shall register their property with the fire department and shall be charged an annual registration fee as determined by the mayor and city council. 
(j)  Firefighters. 
(1)  Qualifications. Any person employed by the city as a firefighter shall have the following qualifications: 
a.  Be at least 18 years of age; 
b.  Not have been convicted of a felony within ten years prior to employment; 
c.  Have good moral character, as determined by investigation under procedure approved by the Georgia Firefighters Standards and Training Council; 
d.  Be in good physical condition, as determined by a medical examination approved by said city council; 
e.  Complete at least a basic training course of 120 hours of instruction within 12 months after being appointed a full-time paid member of the department (if the department employs three or more firefighters); and 
f.  Train, drill or study in city council-approved school, classes, or courses at least 120 hours in each calendar year following the first year of employment. 
(2)  Duties. It shall be the duty of all firefighters to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
(k)  Daily inspections. Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined daily. Such inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatus is maintained in excellent working condition at all times, ready for immediate service and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(l)  Right-of-way of apparatus. The fire department, including its apparatus, when going to any fire in the city or returning therefrom, shall have the right of way over streets, lanes and ways of the city to exclusion of all persons, vehicles and railroad trains of every kind. 
(m)  Persons permitted on apparatus. No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. 
(Code 1991, § 3-602) 
Editor's note— The Fire Department of the City of Greenville, Georgia, is a volunteer fire department. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control and licensing of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonmen t means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. 
Adequate food means palatable, uncontaminated, and nutritionally correct food sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top, and a bottom, suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind, rain, and other elements with sufficient bedding inside the shelter during cold weather. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent dehydration or significant risk to the animal's health from the lack of it. 
Animal means any living vertebrate other than humans and rodents. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the county board of commissioners to administer and enforce this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the county board of commissioners for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Board of commissioners means the Meriwether County Board of Commissioners. 
Guard dog means any dog maintained for the purpose of safety or security which dog is reasonably expected to attack other persons or animals either independently or on command. 
Humane care of animals means the provision of adequate food, adequate water, and adequate shelter to an animal consistent with its normal requirements. 
Inhumane treatment or care of animals means any act, omission, or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to any animal. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian with a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Jurisdiction of this chapter means the unincorporated areas of the county except in those cases arising from joint government services under this chapter in which cases jurisdiction shall extend to the combined area of governance of the local governments party to the contract for joint government services. 
Livestock means all animals so defined by Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, Section 4-3-2(1) as follows: all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all ratites, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus, and rheas. Also included are poultry, deer, giraffe, and other even-toed and hoofed animals. 
Meriwether County means the Board of Commissioners of Meriwether County, Georgia, and its employees, agents, and assigns. 
Owner means any person, partnership, or corporation owing possessing, keeping, or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed harbored if fed or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance means if an animal: 
(1)  Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner without the express consent of the person owning or occupying the property; 
(2)  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways; 
(3)  Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; 
(4)  Is repeatedly at large; or 
(5)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
Records of appropriate authority means and includes records of: 
(1)  Any county or municipal animal control agency; 
(2)  County board of health; 
(3)  Federal, state, or local court; or 
(4)  Any animal control officer employed under this chapter. 
Restraint means: 
(1)  Having an animal on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands; 
(2)  Having an animal within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city; 
(3)  Having an animal in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner if zoned for such as a permissible activity by the city and/or the board of commissioners. Invisible fence systems may be allowed if maintained in good working order and if they keep the animal contained. Any person using an invisible fence shall post a sign near the entrance to the property indicating an invisible fence is in use; 
(4)  Having an animal on a running line which has a connection between two fixed points of not less than 30 feet and a lead of not less than 15 feet, which lead must be attached to the animal by a chest harness that fastens on the back of the animal rather than on its neck. No other means of restraint may be used to attach an animal to a running line. 
Running at large means any animal off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
(Code 1991, § 31-101; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-2. - Penalty for violation of this chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1991, § 31-102; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-3. - Citations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for that violation and ordered to appear in either the municipal court of the city or the Magistrate Court of Meriwether County. Such citation may be issued by an animal control officer and based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who has witnessed the violation. In the latter case, the witness shall be subject to subpoena to testify for the city at the hearing of the case. 
(Code 1991, § 31-103; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-4. - Joint government services. 
The city may contract and enter into formal agreements with the county for joint animal control services and codes for the shared use of personnel, facilities, and equipment used in the provision of such services. 
(Code 1991, § 31-104; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-5. - Designation of animal control officer. 
(a)  The county shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of animal control officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The county may carry out the duties of animal control for the city pursuant to an agreement entered into under section 4-4. 
(c)  Animal control officers are authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this chapter. Law enforcement officials of the county and the city shall cooperate with animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Animal control officers shall not be authorized to make arrests under this chapter unless they are also certified as law enforcement officers by the state. 
(Code 1991, § 31-105; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-6. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove to a safe location any animal that appears abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
(Code 1991, § 31-106; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-7. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere harass, or otherwise obstruct any animal control officer in the official performance of his duties. 
(Code 1991, § 31-107; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-8. - Keeping of wild or non-domesticated animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise or keep, or permit to be raised or kept, on any property located within the city any wild or non-domesticated animal unless specifically permitted by O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4. 
(Code 1991, § 31-108; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-9. - Livestock exempted from this chapter. 
The keeping, raising, and/or producing of livestock in any manner shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 31-109; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-10. - Restraint of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep under restraint any animal owned by or in the custody or control of such person. 
(Code 1991, § 31-110; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-11. - Creation of public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a public nuisance as defined by this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 31-111; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-12. - Confinement of female animals in season. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or owner having custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to confine such female animal so as to prevent contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Code 1991, § 31-112; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-13. - Animal care. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody of an animal to fail to provide his animals with adequate food, adequate water, adequate shelter, and humane care, and to fail to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
(Code 1991, § 31-113; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-14. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in cruelty to animals as proscribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-24-4 and to engage in dogfighting as proscribed by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37. 
(Code 1991, § 31-114; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-15. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. 
(Code 1991, § 31-115; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-16. - Exposure to poisons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose a poisonous substance, mixed with food or not, so that the substance is liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Code 1991, § 31-116; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-17. - Removal of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to fail to immediately remove any excrement deposited by his animal on public property, walks, or recreation areas. 
(Code 1991, § 31-117; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-18. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals. 
Any animal that is known to have bitten a person is required to be confined by the owner for the purpose of quarantine for not less than ten days at the expense of the owner. The method of quarantine shall be determined by the county health department in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 
(Code 1991, § 31-118; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-19. - Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat kept in the city to fail to have the animal inoculated against rabies and to have a rabies tag attached to the animal's collar. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. This provision is adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3 et seq. 
(Code 1991, § 31-119; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-20. - Number of dogs and cats per residential lot. 
It shall be unlawful for there to be more than three dogs and three cats on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of dogs and cats shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals; 
(2)  A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on the owner's property for a period of 12 weeks after their birth; 
(3)  Residential lots of five or more acres, lots zoned RR, R-20, or R-40 are limited to five dogs and five cats; 
(4)  Foster home operators (the term "foster home" means any place routinely or in the practice of providing temporary care for animals, except equine. A foster home must be under a written contract with a licensed animal shelter. A foster home will be considered an agent for the animal shelter, and not an animal shelter itself), kennels, or other individuals who have been granted a waiver under section 4-21. 
(Code 1991, § 31-120; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-21. - Waiver to animal limitations. 
(a)  Upon written application and upon review and approval based upon the criteria set forth below, the animal control board may grant a waiver of section 4-20. In order to grant a waiver, the board must find that: 
(1)  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing that a waiver should be granted; 
(2)  Granting the waiver will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others; 
(3)  The waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; 
(4)  The waiver does not violate the city zoning ordinance, appendix A to this Code; and 
(5)  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater number than allowed under section 4-20. Examples of such special use or need include, but are not limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization, use of animals for therapeutic or other purposes, and emergency care of pets owned by other persons. 
(b)  The written application for waiver shall be accompanied by an application fee. The amount of the application fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The owner shall post a conspicuous sign, large enough to be read from any public thoroughfare adjacent to the owner's property, stating that a waiver of section 4-20 has been applied for and the date, time, and location of the hearing to be held on the application. The sign must be posted not less than 15 days prior to the hearing on the application. 
(c)  Any decision denying a waiver may be reviewed by the city council in its discretion, and any granting of a waiver may be revoked upon a finding that the owner is in violation of the public nuisance provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1991, § 31-121; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-22. - Warning notice on premises using guard dogs. 
The owner, tenant, or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located shall conspicuously and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property, which notice shall contain block letters easily read at a distance of 50 feet, which block letters shall read: 
"Warning—Guard Dog" 
These letters shall be either red or black on a white background. If the dog is kept in a fence, the posted warning shall be placed on the fence at intervals of not more than 50 feet apart and at the entrance and exit of the fence. In the case of apartments, condominiums, or businesses, the notice shall be posted at every entrance and exit to the apartment, condominium, or business. 
(Code 1991, § 31-122; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-23. - Invisible fences. 
The property owner or occupier of any property protected by an invisible fence restraining an animal shall post a sign at the location of the fence. The sign shall read "Invisible Fence—Animal Inside" so that the sign may be read by all persons approaching the fenced area. 
(Code 1991, § 31-123; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Secs. 4-24—4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-50. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1991, § 31-176; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-51. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
If the owner of an impounded animal is known or can reasonably be identified, the animal control officer shall notify that person by telephone or by mail within two working days of the impoundment. The owner may claim and take custody of the animal within four working days of the impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, boarding fee, and upon providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the impounded animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner who shall have the animal inoculated within five working days of the release and who shall provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. Failure to provide the certificate shall result in a new impoundment. 
(Code 1991, § 31-177; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-52. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
If an impounded animal has remained unclaimed for a prescribed period of time or if it has been injured or is suffering and in great pain and if such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation, the animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible or to donate any animal to a public or private nonprofit institution or agency. Disposal of an animal under this section does not relieve the owner from any other liabilities. If the owner is known or ascertainable, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal for a reasonable time until such owner can be reached. If the owner fails or refuses to reclaim the animal within ten days of receipt of notice of impoundment, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal as provided for in this section. 
(Code 1991, § 31-179; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Secs. 4-53—4-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 4-78. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority; 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(3)  Inflicts a severe injury on another animal without provocation on public or private property. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, unprovoked, bites a human being on private or public property. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable both to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and top. If the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape. Such enclosure shall also provide adequate shelter for the dog. 
(Code 1991, § 31-201; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-79. - Exemptions. 
Any dog being used by a law enforcement officer to assist in official duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this article even if it inflicts injury if the person injured: 
(1)  Was committing a willful trespass or tort; 
(2)  Was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; 
(3)  Had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; 
(4)  Was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Code 1991, § 31-202; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-80. - Violations of this article. 
Provisions regarding the violation of this article, and the penalties therefor, shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-32. 
(Code 1991, § 31-203; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-81. - Animal control board. 
In accordance with state law, the board of commissioners of the county have established an animal control board to conduct all hearings required under this article. The membership, terms and procedures of the board shall be as the board of commissioners shall provide. All members of the animal control board shall be residents of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 31-204; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-82. - Investigation; notice to owner. 
Investigations by animal control officers regarding the classifications of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, notice to owners, and the classification process of such dogs shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-23 and 4-8-24. 
(Code 1991, § 31-205; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-83. - Procedures for classification. 
Provisions pertaining to procedures for classification of a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, notice requirements and hearings shall be applied in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(Code 1991, § 31-206; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-84. - Duties of owners of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs; registration fee. 
The provisions of this section shall be applied in accordance with state law. In accordance with that section, any person possessing or intending to possess a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must provide the animal control board with proof of liability insurance, issued by an insurer licensed to do business in the state, in an amount of not less that $50,000.00, which policy of insurance must provide coverage against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog during the term of the coverage. A separate policy must be maintained for each dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous. In the alternative, the owner may provide a surety bond in an amount not less than $50,000.00, issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state providing payment of the bond to any person who recovers in a court of law for injuries inflicted by the dog up to the amount of the recovery or the bond, whichever is less. In addition, the owner of each dog classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall pay an annual registration fee. The amount of the registration fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time 
(Code 1991, § 31-207; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-85. - Confinement. 
All provisions permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside a proper enclosure shall be applied by the animal control officer in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1991, § 31-208; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 4-86. - Confiscation of dogs. 
All confiscation of dogs shall be done in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-30. 
(Code 1991, § 31-209; Ord. of 10-7-2008(2), § 1) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 6-1. - Adoption of state codes. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the technical building and construction codes listed in this section are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes. The state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law, are as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. 
(9)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition. 
(10)  CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Appendix G, as the Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(b)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. 
(c)  Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that official of the city as designated by the mayor, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
(Code 1991, § 35-101) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions of terms used in state codes. 
(a)  Wherever the term "inspector," as in "building inspector," "plumbing inspector," etc., is used in the state codes, it shall mean the person designated by the mayor and city council to administer and enforce the provisions of said code. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the state codes, it shall mean the city attorney of this municipality. 
(Code 1991, § 35-102) 
Sec. 6-3. - Copies on file. 
Copies of the expressly incorporated state codes shall be on file for public inspection in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1991, § 35-103) 
Sec. 6-4. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)  The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
Sec. 6-5. - International Property Maintenance Code—Adoption. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures and herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6-6. 
(Ord. No. 2010-006, § 1, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Additions, deletions and changes. 
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: The City of Greenville. 
Section 103.5. Delete section and insert: "Fees shall be as determined by the Authority have Jurisdiction and appropriately posted." 
Section 112.4. Insert: "$300.00 and $500.00." 
Section 302.4. Insert: "8-10 inches." 
Section 304.14. Insert: "April 1 and October 1." 
Section 602.3. Insert: "November 1 and April 1." 
Section 602.4. Insert: "November 1 and April 1." 
(Ord. No. 2010-006, § 2, 10-5-2010) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - License fee; levy and scope. 
There is hereby levied for each calendar year a license fee on each person, partnership, or corporation listed in this chapter, in accordance with the provisions appearing in the same. 
(Code 1991, § 33-101) 
Sec. 8-2. - Applications. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this municipality shall submit an application for such license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual; or 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind of business to be conducted; 
d.  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, or director of the applicant for violation of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state, or federal government; and 
g.  Such additional information which the city clerk or city council may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Verification. Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  Payment of fee. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the fee chargeable for such license, such amount to be prorated by quarters to the end of the fiscal year. 
a.  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(5)  Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the city clerk, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(Code 1991, § 33-102) 
Sec. 8-3. - Procedures for issuance. 
(a)  Review by city officers. If any provision of this chapter or any licensing ordinance of the city provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the application to such officer within 48 hours of the time of the receipt of the application. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the city clerk within seven days after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Council consideration. Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the city clerk shall forward such recommendation and/or application to the city council, or its designated committee, for consideration and action at its next regular scheduled public meeting. 
(c)  Issuance of license. Upon the express approval of the city council, or its designated committee, the city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the mayor and city clerk. 
(d)  Limitation on issuance. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Council discretion. The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 1991, § 33-103) 
Sec. 8-4. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 1991, § 33-104) 
Sec. 8-5. - Inspections. 
(a)  Search of premises. Whenever inspections are a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of public peace, order, or morality that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is a reasonable precedent to the licensing of a business or to the detection of violations of the public welfare that would normally be cause to revoke a license for any period of time, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. 
(c)  Refusal to allow inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 1991, § 33-105) 
Sec. 8-6. - Termination and renewal of licenses. 
(a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on January 15 of the year following the year in which they are issued. 
(b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the city clerk on or before November 15 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application and be accompanied by all fees. 
(c)  An applicant for renewal of a license shall be entitled to a refund of fees tendered if he withdraws his application for renewal prior to final action on the same by the city council. 
(d)  All license fees shall be prorated over the calendar year in which the license is to have effect. 
(Code 1991, § 33-106) 
Sec. 8-7. - Revocation; suspension. 
The city council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings may, in the bases of its findings, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 33-107) 
Sec. 8-8. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, and provided that all building and zoning requirements are compiled with. 
(Code 1991, § 33-108) 
Sec. 8-9. - Transfer of licenses. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued; but, in cases where the ownership is changed and both the name and location of the licensed business or occupation are maintained, the mayor and city council may allow the license to be transferred. 
(Code 1991, § 33-109) 
Sec. 8-10. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee to the city clerk. The amount of the duplicate license fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(Code 1991, § 33-110) 
Sec. 8-11. - Branch offices. 
For the purpose of this chapter, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business, for which a separate license shall be required; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. 
(Code 1991, § 33-111) 
Sec. 8-12. - Separate license. 
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. 
(Code 1991, § 33-112) 
Sec. 8-13. - False statements. 
Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application herein required or in response to any inquiries made by the city clerk or an authorized official of the city in carrying out his duties under this chapter shall make the applicant or licensee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1991, § 33-113) 
Sec. 8-14. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, company, or corporation required by this section to obtain a license to engage in any trade, business, or profession within the corporate limits of the city, who shall fail to make application therefor within the time limits prescribed, shall be subject and required to pay a penalty of 50 percent of the regular license fee; provided that the city clerk-treasurer when, in his judgment, circumstances may seem to warrant, may grant an extension of time, in no case exceeding 60 days, within which time to file application and pay the license fee. No penalty will be charged on any license on which an extension of time has been granted. 
(b)  Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction in city court, be punished according to the general penalties described in § 1-6. 
(Code 1991, § 33-114) 
Secs. 8-15—8-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCHEDULE OF LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 8-32. - Established. 
The fee schedule shall be established from year to year by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 33-201) 
Secs. 8-33—8-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS REGULATED 

Sec. 8-53. - Insurance businesses. 
(a)  License required. Each person, agency, firm or company doing an insurance business within the municipal corporate limits shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee established. The annual business license fee for each company authorized by the state to write life, accident, and sickness insurance, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time for each separate business location of such company in the city, with an additional fee of one percent of collected gross premiums. 
(Code 1991, § 33-301) 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 8-54. - Construction contractors. 
(a)  Plumbers. No master, contracting, or journeyman plumber, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2, shall be permitted to engage in any plumbing business in this municipality, unless such person shall hold a valid certificate of qualification issued to him by the division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. 
(b)  Electrical contractors. No electrical contractor, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2, shall be permitted to engage in any electrical contracting business in this municipality, unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the state division of electrical contractors. 
(c)  Warm air heating contractors. No warm air heating contractor, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2, shall be permitted to engage in any warm air heating contracting business in this municipality, unless such person shall hold a valid certificate of qualification issued to him by the division of conditioned air contractors or by the county in which this municipality is located. 
(d)  General contractors. All general contractors who contract with this municipality for any public work exceeding $1,000.00 shall be required to obtain a performance and payment bond in the amount and manner specified by state law. 
(Code 1991, § 33-302) 
Sec. 8-55. - Peddlers and itinerant merchants. 
(a)  License required. Each peddler and itinerant merchant who does business in this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, boat, or public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment, or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler means and includes any person, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products, or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not be applicable to traveling salespersons or nonresident merchants as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq., nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious, or philanthropic organizations. 
(d)  Bond. Prior to the issuance of a transient business license, the mayor may in his discretion require a bond to be posted. Such bond shall be payable to the city in an amount deemed sufficient to reimburse citizens of this city for damages growing out of transactions with transient merchants. 
(Code 1991, § 33-303) 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-56. - Charitable solicitors. 
(a)  Registration required. Any person or persons who wish to solicit donations or contributions for, or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, or civic club or organization shall be required to register such solicitation or sale with the chief of police at least 48 hours in advance of such event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(b)  Exemption. This section shall not apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such organization or church. 
(Code 1991, § 33-304) 
Sec. 8-57. - Yard sales. 
Any person or persons who regularly engage in "yard" or "garage" type sales shall be required to first obtain a business license. For purposes of this section, the term "regularly" means more than twice annually. 
(Code 1991, § 33-305) 
Sec. 8-58. - Other activities. 
Every other legally engaged in and income-producing activity which falls within the specifications of this chapter shall require a business license prior to its commencement. 
(Code 1991, § 33-306) 
Chapter 10 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL AND SEDIMENTATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Committee means the state soil and water conservation committee. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
District means the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil and erosion and sediment resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also know as "plan." 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished grade means the final grade or elevation of the ground surface forming the proposed design. 
Grading means altering surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes, this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Local planning commission means the Meriweather County Planning Commission. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to begin a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Sediment means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Slope means degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing and enduring soil cover or vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural practices means soil and water conservation measures, other than vegetation, utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss (including, but not limited to, rewrap, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc.). 
Vegetative practices means measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, springing, or planting producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(Code 1991, § 36-101) 
Sec. 10-20. - Scope and exclusions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any lands other than federal and state lands, except for the following: 
(1)  "Surface mining," as the same is defined in subsection (A) of section 3 of the "Georgia Surface and Mining Act of 1968" O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, as now or hereafter amended; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences when they are constructed by or under contract with the owners for his occupancy; 
(5)  Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation and harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of pasture land, forestry land management practices, including harvesting, farm ponds, dairy operations, livestock and poultry management practices, and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)  Any project involving five acres of less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves five acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the Georgia Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; or construction and maintenance, or either, by any water or sewerage authority established by the general assembly of this state; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the specifications used by the Department of Transportation for control of soil erosion and sedimentation on its highway construction projects; 
(9)  Land-disturbing activities conducted by any airport authority, but any such land-disturbing activity shall conform as may be feasible and practicable to the minimum standards set forth in section 10-22; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electrical membership corporation, municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, but any such land-disturbing activity shall conform as may be feasible and practicable to the minimum standards set forth in section 10-22. 
(Code 1991, § 36-102) 
Sec. 10-21. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Generally. The landowner, developer, and designated planners and engineers are encouraged to review the general development plans and detailed plans of any unit of government that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They are also encouraged to become acquainted with the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Compliance. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the confines of the city without first obtaining a permit from the county planning commission to perform such activity. 
(2)  The applications for permit shall be submitted to the building inspector of the city, who shall provide the applications to the county planning commission. Applications for permits will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sediment control plan. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (d) of this section. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 10-22. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $25.00, shall be charged for each application. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application for a permit, the county planning commission shall refer the applications and plan to the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the county planning commission. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district. Such district review will not be required if the county planning commission and district have entered into an agreement which allows the county planning commission to conduct review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(c)  Permits. 
(1)  A permit will be issued after the district has determined that the plan for erosion and sediment control complies with the requirements of section 10-22 and after the mayor and city council have determined that the plan complies with all ordinances, rules and regulations in effect within the city. 
(2)  Permits will be issued or denied as soon as practical after the application is filed with the building inspector but in any event not later than 45 days after the receipt of a completed application. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in stages, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  A permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the building inspector upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with the permit conditions, or with this article. 
(d)  Data required. The applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information for the entire tract of land to be disturbed, whether or not the tract will be developed in stages: 
(1)  A narrative description of the overall project. This narrative shall include: 
a.  Anticipated starting and completion dates of each sequence and stage of land-disturbing activities and the expected date the final stabilization will be complete; 
b.  A description of the sediment control practices; 
c.  An adequate description of general topographic and soils conditions of the tract as available from the office of the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District; 
d.  A description of the zoning classification of adjacent property and a description of existing structures, buildings, and other fixed improvements located on surrounding properties; and 
e.  A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soil, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities, and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
(2)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations bearing the signature/seal of a registered engineer and containing: 
a.  A site location drawing of the proposed project, indicating the location of the proposed project in relation to roadways, jurisdictional boundaries, streams, and rivers; 
b.  A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed; 
c.  A topographic map containing contours at an interval and scale that will depict the existing and finished grades existing and proposed watercourses, and the proposed features of the developments; 
d.  A plan for temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measures; 
e.  Specifications of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with the standards and specifications of this article; and 
f.  Computations, timing schedules, and other supportive data required for review of applicant's plan. 
(Code 1991, § 36-103) 
Sec. 10-22. - Principal and standards. 
(a)  Implementation. Excessive soil erosion and resulting pollution can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. These provisions shall be incorporated into the sketch plan. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the standards and specifications of this article. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  General design principles. The permittee shall follow sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation consistent with the following principles: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation (regarding other development activities) shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations of the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(c)  Standards and specifications. Plans for land-disturbing activities shall contain soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications which conform to the publication entitled Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia which is on file in the office of the building inspector. The publication is hereby incorporated by reference in this article. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
(2)  Sediment basins that are hazardous to life or property shall be fenced and posted in accordance with the standards and specifications incorporated by reference in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 36-104) 
Sec. 10-23. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the building inspector upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted or promulgated pursuant to this article; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county planning commission within 30 days after receipt by the county planning commission of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the county planning commission, after exhausting his administrative remedies to the mayor and city council shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Meriwether County Superior Court. 
(Code 1991, § 36-105) 
Sec. 10-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(c)  The city and its agents shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Code 1991, § 36-106) 
Sec. 10-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
Any person, corporation, business, partnership, or consortium who performs a land-disturbing activity, as defined in this article, in violation of this article shall be liable to fine and/or injunction, mandamus and/or procedure by any governmental body, or by any entity aggrieved by such land-disturbing activities. Any fine imposed shall not exceed $25.00 per day for each day the violation exists. 
(Code 1991, § 36-107) 
Sec. 10-26. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District for damage to any person or property. 
(Code 1991, § 36-108) 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 

Sec. 12-1. - Adoption of national fire prevention code. 
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the NFPA 101, 2000 edition, Life Safety Code thereof and the whole thereof, except for such portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 10-101) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definition of terms used in code. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Wherever the term "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the chief of the fire department of the city, and whenever the term "bureau of fire prevention" is used in such code, it shall be held to mean the fire department of the city. 
(2)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(3)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(Code 1991, § 10-102) 
Sec. 12-3. - Building numbering. 
(a)  Display of street numbers required. Every house, mobile home, apartment, business or other building in the city shall have a street number assigned to it by the city or its designated agent as per the system of numbering in the city, and said number shall be displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this section. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this section. Such lot, pad or apartment number shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for number not in sequence. 
(b)  Method of display. 
(1)  Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, provided such signs are of a durable type and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
(2)  If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curb, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, the street number shall not be displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mailbox complying with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Size, condition of numbers. Street numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Those affixed to mailboxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of two inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(d)  Duty of owner; violations. The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives to comply with the provisions of this section. If the provisions of this section shall be found to have been violated, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the manner in which this section is being violated, and giving the owner ten days to bring the property into compliance. Each day a violation of this section continues after the expiration date of such ten-day period shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(e)  Responsibility for enforcement. The responsibility for making the inspections provided for in this section, and for the enforcement of the provisions hereof, shall rest upon the city code enforcement department, the city fire department, and the city police department, and the agents and employees of such departments are hereby authorized and empowered to make cases and issue summonses for violations. 
(Code 1991, § 10-105A; Ord. of 12-8-2009(1), § 10-105A) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; city as trustee of cemetery funds, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Management and supervision. 
The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance, and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 25-101) 
Sec. 14-2. - Superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(a)  Appointment. The mayor and city council shall appoint a superintendent of municipal cemeteries, which officer shall be subject to removal at any time by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Duties. The superintendent of municipal cemeteries shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and city council; 
(2)  To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the municipal cemeteries, and at least once a month to turn over to the city treasurer all monies collected on such accounts; and 
(3)  To see to the digging of graves and to the proper entering of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Code 1991, § 25-102) 
Sec. 14-3. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)  Lot valuation. The mayor and city council shall place a value upon all unsold lots in the municipal cemeteries, and shall record such valuations on an official map or plan of each cemetery, which maps shall be kept on file, open to public inspection, in the office of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase an easement in a particular lot or lots, for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lot or upon making arrangements, according to rules and regulations that may be established by the mayor and city council, for the purchase of such lot or lots on an installment plan. 
(c)  Discrimination forbidden. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots on any basis. 
(d)  Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and city clerk and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyances shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the purchaser of each burial lot an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in such lot; shall state the maximum number of graves allowed on each such burial lot as shown by the plat; and, by reference therein made, shall convey each lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance. 
(e)  Recordation of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lot, the city clerk, in addition to collecting the purchase price thereof, shall collect from the purchaser an amount sufficient to have such conveyance recorded in the clerk's office, Meriwether County Superior Court, and shall have such conveyance so recorded before delivery thereof to such purchaser. No sale or transfer of any such burial lot or any right therein, nor any subdividing of any burial lot by any purchaser or those claiming under him, shall be valid unless approved in writing by the city or until the deed of transfer and such written approval are recorded in the clerk's office of the Meriwether County Superior Court. 
(f)  Records of ownership. The mayor and city council shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the municipal cemeteries, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of burial of each. 
(g)  Sale or transfer by owner. Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 25-103) 
Sec. 14-4. - Rules for interment. 
No deceased person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until the superintendent of municipal cemeteries has found: 
(1)  That the lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; 
(2)  That the person arranging for such burial has the right to the use of such lot; 
(3)  That such lot is not used beyond its capacity; and 
(4)  That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. 
(Code 1991, § 25-104) 
Sec. 14-5. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  Enclosures. No curbing, fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways if it so desires. 
(b)  Plantings. 
(1)  The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within a municipal cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to the mayor and city council and approved thereby. 
(2)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any grave site with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
(c)  Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
(1)  Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. 
(2)  Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(d)  Mausoleums. Mausoleums may be placed on the burial lots designated on the plat of a municipal cemetery as "memorial lots," by the holders thereof, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Before erecting any mausoleum, the holder of such lot shall furnish complete plans and specifications to the city clerk, for submission to the mayor and city council, together with application for permission to construct; and no mausoleum shall be erected until such application is approved. 
(2)  A mausoleum shall be situated from the front line of the lot on which it is placed at a distance not less than the depth of the structure itself, and from all other sides of the lot at a distance equal to the greatest height of the structure. 
(3)  No bodies shall be placed in any such mausoleum except in sealed caskets and in hermetically sealed compartments. 
(Code 1991, § 25-105) 
Sec. 14-6. - General regulations. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down, or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walks, or lawn spaces, without the consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure, mausoleum, or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery. 
(c)  Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol, or other firearm within any municipal cemetery except at a funeral ceremony. 
(d)  Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatever. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the perimeter of any municipal cemetery. 
(f)  Entering cemeteries at night. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any municipal cemetery or walk upon or across any such cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(g)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal cemetery. 
(h)  Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(i)  Disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the mayor and city council and the county board of health. 
(Code 1991, § 25-106) 
Sec. 14-7. - Authority of the city to regulate. 
(a)  The mayor and city council reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable so to do in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers (or their successors in office), or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any person or the family of such person who has erected any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any act or acts, thing or things, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid and that he and his heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter and subject to all amendments hereto made by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 25-107) 
Chapter 16 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, maintain and operate a municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; city courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Scope of jurisdiction. 
The city court of this municipality shall try violations of municipal ordinances and shall have the power and authority to impose fines upon persons convicted of said offenses, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law if such fines are not paid. 
(Code 1991, § 5-101) 
Sec. 16-2. - Appointment and qualifications of judge. 
The judge of the city court shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. No person shall be appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, and has been actively engaged in the practice of law, either as an attorney or as a judge, for at least five years preceding his appointment. 
(Code 1991, § 5-102; Ord. No. 2015-0001 , § 1, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 16-3. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the city court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1991, § 5-104) 
Sec. 16-4. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by the city clerk, the building inspector, or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the day, hour, and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the city court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1991, § 5-105) 
Sec. 16-5. - Subpoenas. 
The city clerk shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the city court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1991, § 5-106) 
Sec. 16-6. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for the same. 
(Code 1991, § 5-107) 
Sec. 16-7. - Arrest and bond. 
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of the Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond with a good security, for the appearance of such person before the judge of the city court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him in the city jail until a trial can be held, provided that the mayor, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. 
(Code 1991, § 5-108) 
Sec. 16-8. - Forfeiture of bond. 
Upon failure of a person to appear in the city court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the judge of said court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein, which date shall not be less than ten days from the passage of such ruling, why they should not be required to pay the amount of said bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon. 
(Code 1991, § 5-109) 
Sec. 16-9. - Court costs. 
The costs which shall be charged against a defendant in the city court in the event of his conviction shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time, which sum shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1991, § 5-110) 
Sec. 16-10. - Malicious prosecution. 
Whenever the judge of the city court, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall assess the prosecution with the court costs and such punitive damages as he deems appropriate. 
(Code 1991, § 5-111) 
Sec. 16-11. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the judge of the city court, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands, or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 1991, § 5-112) 
Sec. 16-12. - Appeal. 
Appeals from decisions of the city court shall be taken to the Meriwether County Superior Court or State Court in the manner provided for appeals from the court of probate. 
(Code 1991, § 5-113) 
Sec. 16-13. - Equipment and technology fee. 
(a)  There shall be imposed by the Municipal Court of the City of Greenville, Georgia ("Municipal Court"), an equipment and technology surcharge in the amount of $10.00 per offense for all offenses except O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said technology surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. 
(b)  All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city, under the administration of the chief of police, to support the equipment and technology needs of the police department and municipal court functions. 
(Code 1991, § 5-114; Ord. of 6-7-2011(1), § 1(5-114)) 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Accumulation of junk. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer to permit to accumulate on such property any "junk", including any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof. 
(1)  Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the police chief to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of the provisions of this section that such material must be removed within 15 days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the mayor and city council are authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. 
(Code 1991, § 32-109) 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 18-2. - Inoperable vehicles or automotive vehicles not having current license plates prohibited on residential property. 
It shall be unlawful for more than three inoperable vehicles or automotive vehicles not having current license plates to be located on any residential property. Any site containing three or more inoperable vehicles or automotive vehicles not having current license plates shall be classified as a junkyard. The term "inoperable vehicle" shall be defined for this section as any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1(34.101.5), 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 18-3. - Unkept vacant lots. 
Every person owning or controlling or in possession of any vacant lot or vacant parcel of lots within the city shall keep the same clean of all trash, garbage, and refuse of any kind or character. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002, § 1(34.104), 8-6-2013) 
Secs. 18-4—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL 

Sec. 18-21. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture. 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
(3)  Blood processing. 
(4)  Bag cleaning. 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture. 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture. 
(7)  Compost heaps. 
(8)  Crematory. 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture. 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture. 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal, or wood. 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture. 
(13)  Fat rendering. 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding. 
(15)  Glue or gelatine manufacture. 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse. 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture. 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture. 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture. 
(20)  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture. 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture. 
(22)  Shoe-blackening manufacture. 
(23)  Soap manufacture. 
(24)  Stockyards. 
(25)  Sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture. 
(26)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins. 
(27)  Tar distillation or manufacture. 
(28)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture. 
(29)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 1991, § 13-101) 
Sec. 18-22. - Open burning. 
(a)  Generally. Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person(s) responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or his duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open burning may be done under permit as follows: 
a.  Application for burning permits shall be on forms provided by the fire chief. 
b.  No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied that: 
1.  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
2.  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
3.  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; and 
4.  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection thereof. 
c.  Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
1.  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
2.  Protect property and the health, safety, and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning. 
d.  If it becomes apparent at any time to the fire chief that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in subsection (b)(1)c of this section, the fire chief or his duly designated agent shall notify the permittee in writing and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(2)  Open burning may be done without permit as follows: 
a.  In those areas where provision for public collection of leaves is not made, the open burning of leaves is permitted. 
b.  In those areas where regular refuse collection is not provided, open burning of ordinary household trash by householders is permitted, provided that: 
1.  The fires are located no closer than 500 feet to any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate; 
2.  Garbage, dead animals, and animal waste are not burned; and 
3.  Materials which create dense or excessive smoke or emissions injurious or noxious to people or property are not burned. 
c.  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
1.  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
2.  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief; or 
3.  For the protection of public health. 
d.  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
e.  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
f.  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, provided no nuisance is created. 
g.  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(Code 1991, § 13-102) 
Sec. 18-23. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire chief and the police chief and such subordinate officers of the fire department and police department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1991, § 13-103) 
Sec. 18-24. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(b)  Action pursuant to section 18-21 shall not be a bar to enforcement of this chapter by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the police chief shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the municipality any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 1991, § 13-104) 
Secs. 18-25—18-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATION 

Sec. 18-52. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the city limits. 
(Code 1991, § 14-101) 
Sec. 18-53. - Specific acts, sounds deemed loud and disturbing. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, and similar devices. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the city for the purpose of broadcasting any information or activity for any other purpose, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the mayor or police chief. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity. The operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the mayor or police chief. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping, or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers. The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums. The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the mayor or police chief. 
(11)  Specific acts, sounds deemed loud and disturbing. 
a.  A braking mechanism, which is powered by the exhaust of the vehicle's engine, typical by means of a devise to divert exhaust systems, for use in braking. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle within the city to use an engine brake or jake brake on the public streets within the city, except in the case of fire protection equipment, emergency vehicles, or in the case of a traffic emergency. 
c.  Observation, upon the braking of a vehicle, of a sudden loud, engine-centered braking noise, uncharacteristic of wheels brakes, shall be prima facie evidence that an engine brake or jake brake was utilized by the driver of the vehicle. 
d.  Any person violating this code section shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance section 1-6 of the City Code. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102; Ord. No. 2016-005 , § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 18-54. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1991, § 14-103) 
Sec. 18-55. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1991, § 14-104) 
Sec. 18-56. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1991, § 14-105) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the City of Greenville shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(a)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(b)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(c)  Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(d)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(e)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(f)  Any persons who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(g)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(h)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempt to do so. 
(i)  Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or attempts to do so. 
(j)  Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets. 
(k)  Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practices, allowed or tolerated. 
(l)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(m)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another. 
(n)  Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(o)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace office or other person having authority. 
(p)  Any person who damages befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(q)  Any person, not a student or officer or employee of any public school within the City of Greenville and not required by his employment to be on the campus of any such school, who enters any such campus when it reasonably appears to the security officer or other staff member of such school that such person is committing any act likely to interfere with the peaceful conduct of the activities of the campus, or has entered the campus for the purpose of committing such act and fails or refuses to leave such campus when directed to do so by said security officer or staff member. 
(r)  Any person loitering or prowling within the City of Greenville generally. For purposes of this subsection, loitering or prowling means being in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly conceals himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person the opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(s)  Any person loitering within the City of Greenville for certain purposes, including for the purpose of begging, unlawful gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia, engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution, with the intent to interfere with or disrupt a school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, in a school building or on school grounds or within 200 feet of school grounds when persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody or responsibility for a pupil or other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his representative or by a law enforcement officer. The term loiter as used herein shall mean to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain, abide or tarry in a public place within the City of Greenville. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that the defendant's acts were lawful and he was exercising his rights of lawful assembly as a part of peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(t)  Any person loitering within City of Greenville in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this section, a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances defined as controlled substances or dangerous drugs in the O.C.G.A. Chapter 13 or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of said chapters of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks; or a person who possesses drug-related objects as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32. 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her presence in a high drug activity geographic area. 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout. 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang, or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion. 
(6)  Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer. 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. 
(8)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. 
(9)  The premises involved are known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of drug activity. 
(u)  Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which intoxicated condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(v)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or with others a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(w)  Reserved. 
(Code 1991, § 32-101; Ord. No. 2013-001, § 1(32-101), 8-6-2013; Ord. No. 2014-002 , § 1, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 20-2. - Maintaining a disorderly house. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep, either by himself or with others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house to the encouragement of gaming, illegal drugs, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(Ord. No. 2013-001, § 1(32-101.5), 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 20-3. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 300 yards of any street, alley, or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1991, § 32-102) 
Sec. 20-4. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians in the city are hereby required to report to the city police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 1991, § 32-103) 
Sec. 20-5. - Throwing of projectiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other projectiles upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1991, § 32-104) 
Sec. 20-6. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 32-105) 
Sec. 20-7. - Bonfires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, during a holiday or at any other time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the fire chief. 
(Code 1991, § 32-106) 
Sec. 20-8. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1991, § 32-107) 
Sec. 20-9. - Weeds. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within the city to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths to obtain a height exceeding ten inches on such property. For the purposes of this section, the term "weeds" shall be deemed to mean jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
(Code 1991, § 32-108) 
Sec. 20-10. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the city. 
(Code 1991, § 32-110) 
State Law reference— Authority of peace officer to remove abandoned vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 20-11. - Obstruction of a law enforcement officer. 
A person commits the offense of obstruction of a law enforcement officer when he knowingly and willfully obstructs or hinders any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1991, § 32-112; Ord. of 6-7-2011(2), § 1) 
Sec. 20-12. - Giving false information to a law enforcement officer. 
A person commits the offense of giving false information to a law enforcement officer when he gives a false name, address, date of birth, or other identifying information to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birthdate. 
(Code 1991, § 32-113; Ord. of 6-7-2011(3), § 1) 
Sec. 20-13. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. A person commits the offense of public indecency when he performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(2)  Exposure of the genitals; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; 
(5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(6)  Urination or defecation; or 
(7)  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 on the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court-approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of the section; however, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense under this section if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this section must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Code 1991, § 32-114; Ord. of 11-1-2011, § 1(32-112)) 
Sec. 20-14. - Public drunkenness. 
A person commits the offense of public drunkenness when that person shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private place not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1991, § 32-115; Ord. of 6-7-2011(5), § 1) 
Sec. 20-15. - Monetary solicitation. 
(a)  Monetary solicitation defined. 
(1)  Monetary solicitation or to monetarily solicit is an act or action performed by an individual that meets the following three criteria: 
a.  Is an in-person request of another individual, either orally or by gesture; and 
b.  The request is for an immediate distribution of money or anything of monetary value; and 
c.  The request occurs on public property, including, without limitation, city streets, sidewalks and parks. 
(2)  Monetary solicitation and monetarily solicit shall not include: 
a.  Requests for signatures on a petition or other document; or 
b.  Distribution of written material that requests individuals to send contributions by mail or make donations in some other manner at a later time, or 
c.  Distribution of pre-addressed envelopes along with a verbal plea to contribute money, provided that no request for an immediate contribution is made; or 
d.  Sale of literature or other merchandise or food where payment occurs at a separate time and location, including through mail order. 
(b)  Monetary solicitation in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine (ATM), provided that when an ATM is located within an ATM facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the ATM facility; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a building, whether publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility. Nothing in this subsection [c](6) shall prohibit monetary solicitation within 15 feet of any other portion of a building other than its exit(s) and entrance(s); 
(3)  Within 15 feet of or within a line for entry to any building, whether the building is publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility. 
(c)  Aggressive monetary solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Blocking the path or passage of the person solicited; 
(2)  Not allowing the person solicited to leave the presence of the solicitor, by following immediately behind or walking alongside the person solicited; 
(3)  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following refusal; 
(4)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(5)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person located in or on a motor vehicle after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(6)  Making any statement, gesture or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat that is intended to compel or force the person solicited to accede to the demands of the solicitor; and/or 
(7)  Touching the person solicited. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Upon conviction under this section, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: The performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(2)  Upon the first conviction under this section, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: The performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(3)  Upon the second conviction under this section, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: The performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 30 days imprisonment. 
(4)  Upon the third and future convictions under this section, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: The performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not lo exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 90 days imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2014-003 , § 1, 11-11-2014) 
Secs. 20-16—20-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW 

Sec. 20-45. - Scope and purpose of article. 
(a)  It is recognized by the mayor and council of the city that the potential may exist under certain circumstances when the congregation of groups of citizens or others on the streets and other public places of the city may be hazardous both to those citizens and other citizens of the city and may cause extreme difficulty for the police department of the city in dealing with crime. 
(b)  It is also recognized that the right of citizens to assemble is a constitutional right and cannot be abridged unless there is a real and immediate threat to the public safety. 
(c)  It is also recognized that juvenile crime is a unique problem which confronts our society as is the need for greater parental responsibility. 
(d)  It is the purpose of this article to provide the mayor and council with the appropriate measures to declare and enforce a curfew under cases of necessity. 
(Code 1991, § 16-101; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-101) 
Sec. 20-46. - Emergency declaration. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to issue an emergency declaration of curfew when, in his judgment, circumstances warrant an immediate declaration. Such curfew shall not exist for more than 48 hours and in order to make such curfew valid, the mayor shall, upon issuance, declare in his order, the events which have caused the curfew to be issued, the duration of such curfew, the area of the city to be involved in the curfew, the ages of the citizens affected, and the activities which are prohibited. If said curfew applies only to minors, it shall declare under what circumstances minors may be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1991, § 16-102; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-102) 
Sec. 20-47. - Formal declaration. 
The mayor and the council in a properly called meeting may issue a formal declaration of curfew by setting forth in a resolution the circumstances or events which are the basis for the issuance of the curfew, the length of the time the curfew shall be in effect, the area of the city involved in the curfew, the ages of the citizens affected by the curfew, and the activities which are prohibited. If said curfew applies only to minors, the resolution shall declare under what circumstances minors may be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1991, § 16-103; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-103) 
Sec. 20-48. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any parent, guardian, or other person having control of a minor to permit said minor to violate any curfew declared under this article. 
(Code 1991, § 16-104; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-104) 
Sec. 20-49. - Dissemination of information. 
As soon as any curfew is declared under this article, the mayor and council shall inform all media of its adoption and shall issue written bulletins to be disseminated in the areas. 
(Code 1991, § 16-105; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-105) 
Sec. 20-50. - Police department enforcement. 
The police department is charged with the responsibility of enforcing the terms of any curfew issued under this article. Enforcement shall be full and uniform and without discrimination of any kind. The violation of the terms of any curfew issued under this article shall be considered a violation of this Code subject to the penalties of section 1-6. 
(Code 1991, § 16-106; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 16-106) 
Chapter 22 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a), (b)(2); ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal power of ad valorem taxation to provide for financial assistance to its development authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Ad valorem tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied to meet the ordinary current expenses of the city an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city, and there is hereby set and levied for the payment of principal and interest on general obligation bonds an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city. Such levies shall be shown separately on all tax bills. The tax millage shall be set by resolution from year to year. 
(b)  Assessment and fair market value. All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 40 percent of its fair market value. The basis for fair market value shall be 100 percent of the fair market value determined for the property by the county for city ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)  Appeal of assessment. Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment by the county board of tax assessors to the county board of equalization as to matters of taxability, uniformity of assessment, and value, and the taxpayer of the county board of tax assessors may appeal to the superior court of the county in which the property lies from a decision of the county board of equalization. All such appeals shall be made in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-29. 
(d)  When taxes are due and payable. Ad valorem taxes shall become due on December 31 each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within 20 days after said due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at ten percent per annum from the due date. 
(e)  Failure to pay tax. The city shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(f)  Against whom charged. Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
(g)  Exempted property. The following property shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)  All public property; 
(2)  All places of religious worship and places of burial; and 
(3)  All buildings used as a college, university, or other seminary of learning. 
(Code 1991, § 4-101; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), § 4-101) 
Sec. 22-20. - Malt beverage excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the city an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces and in similar proportion of bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city and, in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1991, § 4-102) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose excise tax on the sale of malt beverages in bottles, cans, or other containers, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 22-21. - Alcoholic beverage excise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per liter and in similar proportion for bottled containers of various sizes. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city and, in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1991, § 4-103) 
Sec. 22-22. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy on life, accident, and sickness insurers. 
(1)  There is hereby set and levied for each calendar year upon each company authorized to write life, accident, and sickness insurance and to write life, accident, and sickness insurance and which is doing business within the municipal corporate limits an annual tax equal to one percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as that used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(b)  Rate of levy on all other insurers. There is hereby set and levied for each calendar year upon each insurance company not taxed under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and which is doing business within the municipal corporate limits, an annual tax equal to one percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the municipal corporate limits. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The gross direct premiums tax levied herein shall be due and payable upon January 1 in each calendar year. Payment shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a report showing the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the city, the classes of insurance written, the premiums received for each class, and such other reasonable information as may be required. The required report shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk and made out over affidavit of an officer of the company. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received within 45 days from the due date. 
(d)  False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation, or agents thereof to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(e)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement. The taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104) 
Sec. 22-23. - Hotel-motel excise tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium orphanage, prison, detention center, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use of possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or posses any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(b)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the corporate limits of the city a tax in amount of three percent of the rent for such occupancy. The tax herein imposed shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after July 1991, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other agreement entered into prior to such date. 
(c)  Collection of tax by operator. It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants hereinabove imposed. 
(d)  Exemption. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(e)  Registration of operator. Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register said business with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must register no later than 30 days after becoming subject to this section; but such grace period for registration after the effective date of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by association or partnership; or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(f)  Certificate of taxing authority. Upon the registration of an operator as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(g)  Due date and required report. All taxes levied by this section shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, and amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Each operator collecting the tax imposed by this section shall be allowed to retain three percent of the gross taxes due and collected as compensation for expenses incurred in collecting, submitting, reporting and paying the tax if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. Should an operator fail to remit the taxes due hereunder for a particular month on or before the due date, such operator may not deduct and retain the collection allowance, but must remit the full amount of gross taxes for that month to the city. 
(i)  Determination if no return made. If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. 
(1)  Notice of determination. The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(j)  Required records. Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this section shall keep all records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers for a period of at least three years, setting forth dates of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(k)  Administration and enforcement. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax herein imposed and, in so doing, shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any person or persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax herein levied; and 
(3)  To allow a credit on any amount due and payable from persons who paid the tax herein levied but were erroneously or illegally subjected thereto. 
(l)  Action for collection of tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(m)  Successors or assignees of operator. If any hotel operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this section and subsequent thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. In the event said purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(n)  Penalties. Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as for other violations of the municipal code. 
(Code 1991, § 4-106) 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to impose, levy, and collect excise tax on hotels, motels, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 22-24. - Public utility franchise tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on each electric light and power company, gas company, telephone and telegraph company, water company, and public utility making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places of the city, for the purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax in the amount of one percent of the annual gross revenue received from residential, commercial, and industrial sales. 
(b)  Due date and required report. The public utility franchise tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the utility was provided and the sale was made, and payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the volume of gross sales by service classification (residential, commercial, industrial) for said preceding month. 
(Code 1991, § 4-107) 
Sec. 22-25. - Local option sales tax. 
The city council is authorized to levy a local option sales tax as necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 4-108) 
Sec. 22-26. - Local option income tax. 
The city council is authorized to levy a local option income tax as necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 4-109) 
Sec. 22-27. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due this municipality shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)  Sale by parcels. When not impracticable, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for sale that the smallest amount that will bring the amount of taxes and costs shall alone be sold. 
(c)  Purchase by city. The city treasurer shall attend all sales of property for taxes due the city and in the event no one person bids for the property put up to be sold as much as the tax due thereon, the city treasurer shall place a bid for such property for the city and, if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. No property so purchased by the city shall ever be sold by the city except at a public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
(d)  Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of municipal taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq., and any other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1991, § 4-110) 
Secs. 22-28—22-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-58. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay annually an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-59. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Revenue collection officer means the city official or city employee designated by the mayor and city council to administrate and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 ("Specific, Business, and Occupation Taxes—Definitions") shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-60. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or re-opening of those accounts. The amount of the administrative fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-61. - Tax levied on businesses and occupations. 
(a)  Generally. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. There is hereby set and levied upon each person, partnership, or corporation engaged in or carrying on a business or occupation within the corporate limits of the city is subject to an occupation tax based upon the number of persons employed by said person, partnership, or corporation, as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, in accordance with the following schedule: 
OCCUPATIONAL TAX RATE SCHEDULE  ($15.00 Administration Fee Included) 

 
0—4 ..... $  100.00 
5 ..... 125.00 
6 ..... 140.00 
7 ..... 155.00 
8 ..... 170.00 
9 ..... 185.00 
10 ..... 200.00 
11 ..... 215.00 
12 ..... 230.00 
13 ..... 245.00 
14 ..... 260.00 
15 ..... 275.00 
16 ..... 290.00 
17 ..... 305.00 
18 ..... 320.00 
19 ..... 335.00 
20 ..... 350.00 
21 ..... 365.00 
22 ..... 380.00 
23 ..... 395.00 
24 ..... 410.00 
25 ..... 425.00 
26 ..... 440.00 
27 ..... 455.00 
28 ..... 470.00 
29 ..... 485.00 
30 & Up ..... 500.00 
Additional Fees: 
Beer & wine license ..... 500.00 
Liquor license ..... 4,000.00 
(Ord. of 1995; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 22-62. - Paying tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-63. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
(a)  The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(b)  The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-64. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-65. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 22-61. 
(2)  A fee per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis when the occupation tax is due and payable to the city. 
(4)  The amount of the fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council, from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-66. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-67. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-68. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid 90 days from the due date of the tax, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days following the commencement of the business and a five percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6, either or both in the discretion of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-69. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-70. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-71. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-72. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-73. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 1 of each year, and on January 15 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required within 30 days following the commencement of such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without having obtained said registration within 30 days following the commencement of the business shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-74. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-74. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-75. - Revenue collection officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-76. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-77. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-78. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-79. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at that person's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of (125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient) will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-80. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the revenue collection officer in accordance with provisions found in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-81. - Effect of failure to comply with ordinance provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee line. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-82. - Lien taken for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the revenue collection officer of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month up to 12 percent annually from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the (marshal or other appropriate officer) of the city upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charters of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and other wise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-83. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council or commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-84. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-85. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the revenue collection officer to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-86. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in dull force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-87. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The mayor and city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Sec. 22-88. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of business or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Ord. of 1995) 
Secs. 22-89—22-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL BONDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to create sinking fund for proceeds from bond tax, Ga. Const., art. IX, § V, ¶ VI; limitation on local debt, Ga. Const., art. IX, § V; revenue bonds, Ga. Const., art. IX, § VI; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-38-1 et seq. and 36-82-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-120. - Preliminary review by finance committee. 
Prior to any issue of bonds by the city, the proposal for such issue shall be referred to the standing finance committee, which committee shall give careful consideration to the proposal and submit a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval, with applicable reasons therefor. 
(Code 1991, § 4-201) 
Sec. 22-121. - Bond ordinances. 
(a)  Contents of bond ordinances. Any bond ordinance introduced for adoption as provided in this section shall contain in substance the following: 
(1)  An authorization for the issuance of obligations, stating in brief and general terms sufficient for reasonable identification the purpose or purpose for which the obligations are to be issued, a statement of the estimated maximum amount of bonds or notes to be issued, and the estimated cost of such purpose or purposes, but related improvements of properties may be treated as one improvement or property; 
(2)  A determination of the period of usefulness of the purpose according to its reasonable life computed from the date of the bonds or, if issued for several purposes, a determination of the average period of usefulness, taking into consideration the respective amounts of obligations authorized for the said several purposes; 
(3)  A determination that the obligations authorized by the bond ordinance will be within the debt limitations prescribed by state law; and 
(4)  A statement of the aggregate cost of the improvement or property sought to be financed, which cost may include the following: 
a.  Interest on obligations until the end of the fiscal year in which the obligations are issued or until six months after the completion of construction or acquisition; 
b.  Architect's fees, accounting, engineering, and inspection costs; 
c.  Costs of issuing and selling obligations; 
d.  Legal expenses; 
e.  Preliminary planning expenses; 
f.  Test and survey expenses; and 
g.  A reasonable proportion of the compensation and expenses of municipal employees in connection with the construction or acquisition of said improvement or property. 
(b)  Procedure for adoption of bond ordinances. 
(1)  Introduction. All bond ordinances shall be introduced in writing at a regular meeting of the mayor and city council, and at such meeting shall receive a first reading, which may be by title. 
(2)  Publication, hearing, and adoption. Any bond ordinance introduced as hereinabove provided shall be published after first reading, together with notice of the date, time, and place set for further consideration and final passage. Such publication shall be at least ten days after introduction and first reading and at least seven days prior to the date for further consideration. At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such meeting or further consideration shall from time to time be adjourned, such bond ordinance may be read by its title, if: 
a.  At least one week prior to such date or further consideration, there shall have been posted, on a bulletin board or other place upon which public notices are customarily posted in the city: 
1.  A copy of such bond ordinance; and 
2.  A notice that copies of such bond ordinance will be made available during such week and up to and including the date of such meeting or further consideration to the members of the general public of the municipality who shall request such copies, naming the place at which such copies will be so made available; and 
b.  Such copies of said bond ordinance shall have been made available accordingly, but otherwise such bond ordinance shall be read in full. All persons interested shall then be given an opportunity to be heard, and the mayor and city council shall proceed to amend the bond ordinance and thereupon finally adopt or reject it, with or without amendments. 
(3)  Final adoption and publication. A bond ordinance shall be finally adopted by the recorded affirmative votes of at least two-thirds of the full membership of the municipal governing authority, and thereafter shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  Effective date of bond ordinances. A bond ordinance shall take effect 20 days after the publication thereof allowing final adoption. 
(Code 1991, § 4-202) 
Sec. 22-122. - Bond sales. 
(a)  Private sale when authorized. All bonds shall be sold at public sale upon sealed proposals, except that bonds may be sold at private sale: 
(1)  Without any previous public offering: 
a.  If constituting all or part of an authorized issue of $20,000.00 or less; or 
b.  If sold to any board, body, agency, commission, instrumentality, district, authority, or political subdivision of any local unit, the state, or the federal government; or 
(2)  If no legally acceptable bid is received at advertised public offering, such bonds or any of them may be sold within 30 days after the advertised date for public bidding; provided, however, that no bonds shall bear interest at any rate of interest which is higher than the rate or maximum rate specified in the notice of sale, or contain substantially different provisions from those specified in said notice. 
Any purchaser of bonds at private sale, other than a public body, shall deposit a certified or cashier's or treasurer's check drawn upon a bank or trust company in an amount equal to five percent of the amount of bonds purchased and such amount shall be applied as in the case of a deposit made at public sale. Any private sale of bonds as permitted hereunder shall be made or confirmed by resolution of the mayor and city council adopted by not less than a two-thirds vote of the full membership thereof, which such resolution shall set forth the date, maturities, interest rate, and price of the bonds and the name of the purchaser. 
(b)  Publication of notice of bond sale. A public sale of bonds shall be advertised at least once and at least seven days prior thereto in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in a publication carrying municipal bond notices and devoted primarily to financial news or the subject of state and municipal bonds and published in the state. 
(c)  Procedure for public sale of bonds. 
(1)  All bidders shall be required to deposit a certified or cashier's or treasurer's check drawn upon a bank or trust company, equal to not less than two percent of the bonds to secure the municipality in part from any loss resulting from the failure of the bidder to comply with the terms of his bid, or as liquidated damages for such failure. 
(2)  All bids for bonds shall be publicly opened and announced at the advertised time and place of sale. Such bids as comply with the terms of the notice of sale shall be considered, and any bid not complying with the terms of such notice may be rejected. All bids received may be rejected. 
(3)  Bonds of two or more issues may be sold on the basis of combined maturities, or the maturities of each issue offered for sale. 
(4)  Bonds may be offered for sale at a single rate of interest, or bidders may be requested to name a single rate of interest, but no proposal shall be considered which offers to pay less than the principal amount of bonds offered for sale or which names a rate of interest higher than the lowest rate of interest stated in any legally acceptable proposal. As between proposals naming the same lowest rate of interest, the proposal offering to accept the least amount of bonds shall be accepted, the bonds to be accepted shall be those first maturing, and as between such proposals, the proposal offering to pay the greatest premium bid for the bonds shall in no event exceed $1,000.00 for the principal amount of bonds offered for sale. In order to effect the foregoing, a sufficient number of the last maturing bonds shall be of the denomination $1,000.00 or less. 
(5)  Bonds may be offered for sale at different rates of interest of the same issue or different rates of interest for different issues, or parts thereof, or bidders may be requested to name any such rates of interest. No proposal shall be considered which offers to pay an amount less than the principal amount of bonds offered for sale or under which the total loan is made at an interest cost higher than the lowest net interest cost to the local unit under any legally acceptable proposal. Such net interest cost shall be computed in each instance by adding to the total principal amount of bonds bid for the total interest cost to maturity in accordance with such bid, and by deduction therefrom of the amount of premium bid, if any. 
(6)  Additional terms or conditions of sale may be established by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Sale of bonds at one time or in installments. Any issue of bonds may be sold at one time or in installments at different times. The maturities of an installment of bonds offered for sale, when combined with all maturities of the issue previously sold, shall be such as to comply with requirements as to maturities of a single issue of bonds. Any unsold part of an issue or installment may be sold notwithstanding that the maturities thereof, when considered alone, do not comply with such requirements. 
(e)  Power of sale. The city treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to sell and award bonds in accordance with the advertised terms of public sale. Such officer shall report in writing to the mayor and city council at the next meeting thereof following such sale, which report shall indicate the principal amount, interest rate, and maturities of the bonds sold, the price obtained, and the name of each purchaser. 
(f)  Attorney's fees. Any qualified and practicing attorney at law who renders services in connection with the issuance and sale of bonds for this municipality shall be compensated for such services in an amount not exceeding one-tenth of one percent of the amount of the bonds issued or proposed to be issued. 
(g)  Application of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of municipal bonds shall be applied only to the purposes for which such obligations are authorized. If, for any reason, any parts of such proceeds are not necessary for such purposes, such part shall be used to pay any outstanding obligations or to finance the cost of any other purpose of purposes which may be deemed proper by the mayor and city council. 
(h)  Prohibited agreements. In the issuance or sale of bond obligations, it shall be unlawful for the mayor and city council or any member thereof or any official: 
(1)  To pay or agree to pay, directly or indirectly, any bonus, commission, fee, or other compensation or consideration for the issuance or for the sale of such obligations, and any amount so paid may be recovered for the municipality; 
(2)  To make any agreement with any purchaser or bidder, or his representative, regarding the deposit or disposition of any monies received or to be received from such sale and ever such agreement shall be void; 
(3)  To make any agreements pertaining to the sale of bond obligations which contains provisions as to any other matter, and such sale and any such agreement shall be void; 
(4)  To make any agreement or "service contract" with respect to publication of notice of sale and printing of bonds or notes, the providing of a legal opinion or for any of such services, whether or not accompanied by an offer to bid for or purchase such obligations. Any such agreement or contract shall be void, and any amount so paid may be recovered for the municipality; except, however, agreements made directly with a newspaper, bond printer, or an attorney licensed to practice law in the state in which he has his office. 
A municipal bond dealer, banker, or financial expert may be engaged or employed as financial advisor to provide financial services in connection with the sale of bond obligations, including the preparation of a bidding circular or prospectus, but no such financial advisor shall purchase any such obligations at any public or private sale, but any such purchase shall not affect the validity of the obligations and the municipality shall recover any compensation and profit to such financial advisor resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1991, § 4-203) 
Sec. 22-123. - Bond records. 
(a)  Application for registration. Any holder of a bond issued by the city may register such bond as to principal and interest, or as to principal only, by making written application for such registration to the city clerk and presenting the bond desired to: 
(1)  The number of bonds presented; 
(2)  The issue; 
(3)  The date; 
(4)  The amount; 
(5)  The date due; and 
(6)  To what extent the bonds are to be registered; 
and each application shall be signed by the applicant who, if holding the bonds in any capacity other than for himself, shall sign the application in the name of the party for whose benefit he holds the bonds, state the capacity in which he signs, and attach proof of such capacity. 
(b)  Bond register. A bond register shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk in which, upon written application and presentation of the bond by the holder thereof as hereinabove provided, shall be entered a description of each bond so presented. Such description shall state: 
(1)  The bond number; 
(2)  The nature of the issue; 
(3)  The face amount; 
(4)  The date issued; 
(5)  The date of maturity; 
(6)  The rate and due dates of interest; 
(7)  Whether the bond is registered as to principal and interest or as to principal only; 
(8)  The name and mailing address of the bond holder; 
(9)  The name of the person registering the bond; and 
(10)  The capacity in which such person registered the bond. 
All bonds registered in compliance with this section shall be nonnegotiable to the extent registered. 
(c)  Statement of registration and form. Upon registration of any bonds as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall stamp, print, or write upon each bond so registered a statement of the registration in the following form, inserting in the blanks the matter applicable to each transaction: 
Registered by ________. Non-negotiable. Principal and interest to be paid only to ________ located at ___________. 
This _____ day of _______, 20___. 
City of Greenville 

 
(d)  Procedure for transfer after registration. In order to transfer any bond which may have been registered under the provisions of this section, the holder thereof shall present the same to the city clerk and shall authorize such transfer in writing, giving the name of the transferee, the number of the bond, of what issue, and the dates of issue and maturity. Such authority shall be signed and acknowledged in the presence of a notary public or some other officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and such notary public or other officer shall certify, in writing and under seal of his office, that such authority was signed and acknowledged in this presence. In addition to giving such written authority, the holder shall enter a statement of the transfer on the face of each bond, properly dated and signed. Thereupon, the city clerk shall enter the transfer of each bond opposite the original entry of registration in the bond register, giving the name of the transferee and date of the transfer, and shall enter the same on each bond over his official signature. The transferee may thereafter, in the manner herein prescribed, also transfer such bond. 
(Code 1991, § 4-204) 
Sec. 22-124. - Lost, destroyed, or defaced bonds. 
(a)  Lost, destroyed, or defaced bonds may be reissued in the form and tenor of the original obligations upon the mayor and city council being supplied to its satisfaction with the following: 
(1)  Proof of ownership; 
(2)  Proof of loss, destruction, or defacing of the obligations; 
(3)  Adequate surety bond; and 
(4)  Payment of the cost of preparation of the new obligations. 
(b)  All such new obligations shall be issued pursuant to resolution of the mayor and city council setting forth the written request of the holder or owner, or his authorized attorney or legal representative, of the lost, destroyed, or defaced obligations and the date, maturity, interest rate, denomination, and numbers of such obligations, and the amount and term of the surety bond. 
(Code 1991, § 4-205) 
Sec. 22-125. - Disposition of bonds and coupons. 
Whenever the city clerk pays any bond or coupon of the city, he shall forthwith stamp, print, or write upon such bond or coupon the word "PAID" and shall notify the standing finance committee that he has in hand such canceled paper, whereupon the finance committee shall take possession of the same after giving the city clerk a receipt for the bonds and coupons. Such bonds and coupons shall thereafter be destroyed by the finance committee in the presence of the city clerk, who shall then make an entry to that effect on the receipt given him. 
(Code 1991, § 4-206) 
Sec. 22-126. - Sinking fund. 
(a)  Establishment. All taxes collected for the payment of principal and interest on city general obligation bonds shall be kept by the city treasurer as a separate fund to be known as the "sinking fund." Under no circumstances shall funds be paid out by the city treasurer for any other purpose than for the payment of the interest and principal on the bonds for which it was collected or for the purpose of investment as provided by law and city ordinance. 
(b)  Certification of amount. Prior to adoption of the annual budget, the amount to be included in the sinking fund for the prospective fiscal year shall be certified by the municipal auditor as an amount sufficient to pay all principal and interest coming due in such fiscal year, and the sinking fund as certified shall be included in the annual budget. 
(c)  Investment of fund. It shall be and it is hereby made the duty of the city treasurer promptly to make arrangements for the investment of the sinking fund in the manner provided by law and, upon approval of such arrangements by the city council, promptly to make such investment. 
(Code 1991, § 4-207) 
Secs. 22-127—22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUDGET[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-151. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1991, § 4-301) 
Sec. 22-152. - Procedures for adoption of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended, and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Introduction and approval. The municipal budget shall be introduced in writing by the mayor and initially approved no later than April 30 of the fiscal year. Upon initial approval by the city council, the city council shall fix the time and place for the holding of a public hearing. 
(2)  Public advertisement. The municipal budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time, and the place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten days prior to the date fixed therefor in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the municipality. 
(3)  Public hearing. 
a.  The municipal budget shall not be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. Such hearing shall be held not less than 21 days after the initial approval of the budget at the time and place specified in the advertisement thereof, and may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. 
b.  The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public hearing in full, or it may be read only by its title if at least one week prior to the date of the hearing a complete copy of the budget shall have been posted in the city hall and shall have been made available to each person requesting the same during the previous week and during the public hearing. 
(4)  Amendments. 
a.  The city council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing, except that no proposed amendment shall be effective without such a hearing it shall: 
1.  Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of appropriations as stated in the initially approved budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than ten percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent. 
b.  Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. Any such amendment must be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and must be read in full at the hearing and before adoption. 
(5)  Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted not later than June 30 of the fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by taxation for the purposes of the municipality. 
(Code 1991, § 4-302) 
Sec. 22-153. - Budget message. 
When introduced to the city council for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and the revenues, together with the reasons for such change; summarize the city's debt position; and include such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-303) 
Sec. 22-154. - Form and content of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit; 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; 
(4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; 
(5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation, and maintenance expenses; and 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1991, § 4-304) 
Sec. 22-155. - Capital program. 
A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvements; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operation and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The information in this section may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1991, § 4-305) 
Sec. 22-156. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The city council may, by majority vote, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1991, § 4-306) 
Sec. 22-157. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1991, § 4-307) 
Sec. 22-158. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1991, § 4-308) 
Sec. 22-159. - Publication of financial statement. 
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures, which fairly represents the financial condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-309) 
Secs. 22-160—22-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSUMER PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-187—22-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 22-211. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Code 1991, § 4-402; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-402, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-212. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-403; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-403, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-213. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and sanitation service. 
(c)  The city has not experienced identity theft related to covered accounts. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Code 1991, § 4-404; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-404, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-214. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer such as a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Code 1991, § 4-405; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-405, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-215. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least 8 characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the mayor and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the mayor and the city attorney. 
(Code 1991, § 4-406; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-406, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-216. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Code 1991, § 4-407; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-407, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-217. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
3.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors) . 
d.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
e.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
f.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
g.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Code 1991, § 4-408; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-408, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-218. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Code 1991, § 4-409; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-409, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-219. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Code 1991, § 4-410; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-410, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-220. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The mayor is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the mayor, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the mayor at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 4-411; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-411, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-221. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city clerk shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Code 1991, § 4-412; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-412, 11-5-2008) 
Secs. 22-222—22-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 22-251. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Code 1991, § 4-422; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-422, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-252. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Code 1991, § 4-423; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-423, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-253. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Code 1991, § 4-424; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-424, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-254. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Code 1991, § 4-425; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-425, 11-5-2008) 
Sec. 22-255. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Code 1991, § 4-426; Ord. No. 2008-006, § 4-426, 11-5-2008) 
Chapter 23 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter is not to be construed as conflicting with any state or federal laws or regulations, nor as authorizing the sale of any alcoholic beverages on which the federal and state taxes have not been paid, nor as authorizing the sale thereof by any person who has not obtained any and all federal and state permits required by the federal and state laws and regulations, nor as authorizing sales at any place or in any manner prohibited by the state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-2. - Findings and public purpose. 
(a)  Pursuant to the vote of the citizens of the city authorizing the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises in bona fide eating establishments and pursuant to the vote of the citizens of the city authorizing the sale of distilled spirits by the package and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city: 
(1)  To establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  To protect and preserve schools, churches, and similar places of public assembly; and 
(3)  To preserve residential areas regarding, among other things, the character of the areas, their particular suitability for particular uses and the congestion in the surrounding roads and streets, with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, and sustaining the stability of neighborhood and property values. 
(b)  Consistent with the previous actions of the mayor and city council limiting malt beverage and wine sales by the drink for consumption on the premises ancillary to the primary business of serving food prepared on the premises, it is also the finding, intent and policy of the mayor and city council that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this chapter shall be strictly limited to bona fide eating establishments which shall be restaurants, as defined in this chapter and which meet all applicable requirements of the same. 
(c)  It is also the finding, intent and policy of the mayor and city council that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be strictly limited to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(d)  It is expressly not the intent of the mayor and city council to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in nightclubs, bars, pubs, dancehalls, pool halls, game rooms or any other establishment not qualifying as a bona fide eating establishment as a restaurant, as defined in this chapter. 
(e)  It is further the stated directive of the mayor and city council that the authority to issue, renew and administer licenses for consumption on the premises and for the sale of distilled spirits by the package granted to the city clerk shall be discharged in accordance with this finding. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-3. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  Insuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant; 
(4)  Insuring that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package is strictly limited to terms and conditions of this chapter; 
(5)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; and 
(6)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
Applicant means a person applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, supper club or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
Church means any permanent place where persons regularly assemble for public religious worship on church owned property. 
City means the City of Greenville, and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the city. 
Convicted or convictions means conviction by any court or jury, as well as the entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contender. 
Distilled spirits mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes but is not limited to brandy. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensed premises include not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located. 
Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting of a corporation, the majority stockholder is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then any one of such persons may act as the majority stockholder. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Minor means any person under the age established as the minimum age for the purchase, possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages as established by the General Assembly of Georgia from time to time. 
Mixed drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to section 23-51. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or any other original consumer container. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine. 
(b)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
(c)  Words and terms not explicitly defined in this chapter or used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 23-5. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in Section 5.13. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-6. - Confidentiality of information. 
For the purpose of protecting the individual business interests or the persons making returns as provided for in sections 23-54, and 23-145, the city licensing authorities shall treat such returns as being of a strictly confidential nature and will not divulge such information unless called for by a court order and/or for city, county, state or federal tax purposes. Any clerks and/or city personnel found guilty of violating such confidence shall be subject to disciplinary action at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-7. - Regulation of open consumption in public; possession of open containers. 
(a)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. However, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of the premises. The licensee shall not have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is not seated at a table or in a chair provided by the licensee. In addition, alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into outdoor dining areas and/or opened in outdoor dining areas by a licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages in a vehicle on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facia evidence of consumption. 
(d)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in this city or while a passenger in a vehicle in this city. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, an open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of the vehicle, if the container is not located in a locked glove compartment, or locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle, or in the possession of a passenger. 
(f)  As used in this section, open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises may apply for a special event permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages by the drink on any property contiguous to the licensee's premises. Any such licensee shall make written application to the city clerk or his designee for a special event permit on forms provided by the city. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for a special event permit shall be cause for denial or revocation thereof. The mayor or his designee, in their discretion, shall have the right to deny or impose conditions on any such special event permit, giving consideration to the size, location, or duration of the event or any such other factors as deemed relevant by the mayor or his designee. All applications for a special event permit must be submitted to the mayor or his/her designee at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the mayor or his designee. The fee for such special event permit shall be $500.00, and no more than five special event permits shall be issued to any one licensee during any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Consumption of alcoholic beverage or possession of open container of alcoholic beverage in passenger area, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Secs. 23-8—23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 23-21. - Required, classifications, fee, duration. 
(a)  Required . It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Classification, fee . Classes of licenses issued under this chapter, activities permitted and regulated thereunder, and the annual license fees, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Retail package licenses: 
a.  Package malt beverage and wine license: retail sale in the original package ..... $500.00 
b.  Package distilled spirit license: retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package ..... 4,000.00 
(2)  Retail consumption on the premises licenses: 
a.  Pouring license restaurant as defined in section 23-142, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by the drink ..... 4,000.00 
b.  Limited pouring license restaurant as defined in section 23-142, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink ..... 500.00 
Wholesale licenses: Resident wholesale dealer's license, wholesale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by a wholesale dealer having a place of business in the city ..... 5,000.00 
(c)  Application fees . Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the following amount: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license ..... $100.00 
(2)  Package wine license ..... 100.00 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license ..... 500.00 
(4)  Pouring license restaurant ..... $500.00 
(5)  Limited pouring license restaurant ..... $500.00 
(d)  Payment of fees . Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. An applicant may pay the annual license fee at the time that the application is filed; and in such event the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license applied for is not issued. If the annual license fee is not paid at the time of application, the annual license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license by the city clerk and no later than 14 days after notification of approval of the license by the city clerk. 
(e)  Issuance restrictions . The following restrictions shall apply to persons seeking a license under this chapter: 
(1)  No person shall hold a license to operate as a retail consumption dealer or retail dealer who also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesale dealer; and 
(2)  No person shall have an interest in more than one license for the package sale of distilled spirits issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-22. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual under this article shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages (wholesaler or brewery) shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation; and such majority stockholder or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 23-23. 
(c)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages (wholesaler or brewery), the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 23-23. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 23-23; provided, however, that the city clerk may require the fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholders of the corporation if he deems it necessary in making his investigation. 
(e)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Residency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 23-23. - Qualifications. 
(a)  A licensee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past ten years of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any other misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance within the past four years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The city manager may at his discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for purposes of this subsection if the city manager determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(c)  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(d)  A licensee shall be the owner of the premises to be licensed or the holder of a lease thereon for substantially the same period to be covered by the license. 
(e)  Any person having two convictions for selling alcohol to a minor within a three-year period shall not be eligible for a license. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, supper club, alcoholic beverage caterer, or brewery. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Residency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 23-24. - Application. 
(a)  Forms, contents. 
(1)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city clerk. All applications shall contain a full and complete and sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts relevant to the requirements of this chapter. Each applicant and any corporate officers or shareholders otherwise required to be fingerprinted shall submit themselves to the police department where a complete set of fingerprints shall be taken. 
(2)  Each application shall include, in addition to all other application fees, a certified check or money order in the amount charged by the state bureau of investigation made payable to the state bureau of investigation to cover the cost of fingerprinting analysis and investigation. 
(b)  Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right which he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information; and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A copy of the deed to the premises, if owned by the licensee; 
(2)  A copy of the lease agreement covering the premises to be licensed, if leased by the licensee; 
(3)  In the case of a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(4)  In the case of a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(5)  A current stamped certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of section 23-33. 
(d)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's stamped certificate clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet all applicable requirements of section 23-33. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-25. - Investigation; hearing. 
(a)  A copy of each application for a license under this article shall be referred within two business days after filing to the police department. The police department shall make a thorough investigation concerning any applicants hereunder if individuals, and the officers and the designated agent or manager, if the applicant is a corporation, and shall submit the results of the investigation promptly to the city manager. 
(b)  No application for an original license shall be considered by the city clerk until after a public hearing has been held thereon by the city clerk, after notice as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  The applicant for an original license shall at his own expense post on the premises to be licensed a notice. The notice shall be posted for at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall be on a board or metal sign having a surface of not less than 12 square feet. The sign shall include the following: 
(1)  That an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises has been filed with the city; 
(2)  The type of license applied for; 
(3)  The time and place of the public hearing to be held on such license application; 
(4)  The name of the proposed licensee; and 
(5)  The name and telephone number of the city staff member where additional information may be obtained. 
Such sign shall be placed at least three feet above the ground and facing the most traveled street. 
(d)  The applicant for an original license shall at his own expense publish in the official legal organ of the county at least 15 days prior to the hearing, a notice containing the same information as required in the posted notice under subsection (c) of this section. This notice shall be printed in letters no smaller than ten-point capital and lower case with at least a one-inch, two-column arrangement. 
(e)  Prior to the date of the hearing, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk a copy of the advertisement required by subsection (d) of this section and a sworn statement of the size of, location of, and information on the sign required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  The city clerk may require additional investigations, reports and information from city departments and other public agencies as may be deemed necessary to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  After a complete license application has been received; the police department and any other investigative reports submitted; public notification completed as required in subsections (c) and (d) of this section; the public hearing held as required in subsection (b) of this section; and the city clerk has determined based on all the information received that the applicant meets all requirements and qualifications for the holding of the license, then the city manager may issue such license. 
(h)  Any applicant submitting a complete license application and completing all public notification and public hearing requirements of subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section whose application is denied may appeal such decision to the mayor and city council. Such appeal must be in writing and made within 30 days of the date of denial. 
(i)  Any person making a false statement in any application for a license, or statement in connection with renewal thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing; and, further, a license if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation. It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee; and a conviction for a violation thereof shall be punished as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-26. - Renewals. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter applications for renewal of licenses shall be made and considered in the same manner as applications for original licenses. 
(b)  No fingerprints shall be required in the case of an application for renewals. 
(c)  No posting of premises and publication of notice by the applicant shall be required in the case of an application for renewal. 
(d)  An application for renewal may, if such is the case, be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city clerk, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any such changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(e)  An application for renewal shall be filed during the month of December. If an existing licensee fails to file for renewal during the month of December, then the licensee shall be required to make application as for an original license. Existing licensees whose renewal application is filed in December as required in subsection (e) of this section and approved by the city clerk shall pay the appropriate licensing fee required by this chapter on or before December 31 of the year for which the existing license will expire. If the existing licensee fails to make payment within ten days after they become due, a penalty of five percent will be added. Moreover, if the existing licensee fails to make payments within 45 days after they become due, the license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law as provided in Section 23-31(7) of this article. 
(f)  In making a determination regarding the renewal of a license, the city clerk shall assess the extent to which the granting of the license or the continued holding of the license would contribute to the following problems: 
(1)  Littering in the area of the establishment; 
(2)  Loitering in the area of the establishment; 
(3)  The public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the establishment; and 
(4)  The exposure of minors to the sale of alcoholic beverages because of the number of minors who frequent the establishment. 
(g)  At the discretion of the city clerk, a public hearing may be required for the renewal of a license if written objections are filed thereto with the city clerk at least 15 days before the end of the renewal period. If any such objection is filed, a public hearing shall be held. Prior to such hearing, the city shall publish at public expense a notice in substantially the same form and manner required under subsection (d) of section 23-25. The applicant shall be given written notice of any objection which is filed and such notice shall be served within 48 hours of the filing of the objection by personal service by a city police officer or by registered or certified mail to the named licensee at the licensed premises. In the circumstances referred to in this subsection, the license under which renewal was applied for shall continue to be valid until the city clerk acts on the application for renewal if the applicant deposits the amount of the annual license fee for the renewal with the city clerk not later than five days after being notified of the filing of the objection. 
(h)  An applicant for renewal whose application is denied may appeal such decision to the mayor and city council. Such appeal must be in writing and made within 30 days of the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-27. - Transfer. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license issued under this article shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir of the deceased unless the city manager determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter, when the time comes to renew the license it shall not be renewed. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not without application for an issuance of a new license introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the city clerk if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f)  In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-28. - Change in business ownership. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk and surrender the license. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-29. - Temporary licenses. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued by the city clerk if in his/her judgment, the denial of a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business or a delay in the opening of a new business. 
(b)  A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city clerk at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-30. - Suspension, revocation. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Notwithstanding final disposition of a case by any court of competent jurisdiction, a license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council for any violation of this and/or another chapter, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(c)  The city clerk is authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under any license for any emergency situation such that the city clerk deems such suspension necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and may remain in force until the city clerk determines that the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the mayor and city council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless it is extended by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Prior to suspending or revoking a license, except as noted in emergency situations in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and city council shall give at least five days prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing at which such suspension or revocation will be considered. Service of such notice shall be perfected by personal service at the licensed premises on the named licensee or an employee of the licensee by a city police officer; or, if personal service may not be so effected, by tacking a copy of the notice to the door of the licensed premises and mailing the original to the named licensee at the licensed premises with a copy mailed to any other address of the named licensee contained in the most recent license application on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-31. - Automatic revocation. 
A license issued under this article shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked; 
(2)  Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within 14 days after notification that the issuance of a license has been approved by the city clerk; 
(3)  Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued unless extended by the city clerk for good cause; 
(4)  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of 30 days unless extended by the city clerk for good cause; 
(5)  The licensed business declares bankruptcy or receivership, is the subject or levy of legal process, or fails to properly account for, file, report and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter; 
(6)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this chapter; 
(7)  Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the city within the time prescribed in section 23-26(e); 
(8)  The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-32. - Wholesale licenses required. 
Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Permit or license from governing authority required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, due process guidelines; fingerprints, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 23-33. - Proximity restrictions. 
(a)  No premises shall be licensed under this chapter whose location is within the following distances: 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises, within 300 feet of any church building, school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises, within 300 feet of any church owned building or within 600 feet of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(3)  Any wine, malt beverages, or distilled spirits, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises, within 300 feet of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, county, or the city. 
(4)  For distilled spirits package sales, the licensee's premises cannot be within 1,500 feet of any other business licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package. 
(b)  As used in this section, the terms "school building," "educational building," "school grounds," or "college campus" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings at which are taught such subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 23-34. - Sale, service in public places. 
(a)  Prohibition . It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any alcoholic beverages in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Prohibition on service of alcoholic beverages from the premises of a retail consumption on the premises licensee . Any licensee holding a city retail consumption on the premises license is strictly prohibited from serving alcoholic beverages purchased from a state wholesaler for sale on their licensed premises under the issuance of a special alcoholic beverage event permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-35. - Sale near housing authority property. 
(a)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(b)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-36—26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-51. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-52. - Rentals paid restricted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business' sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package malt beverages and wine. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-53. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-54. - Retention of records; filing reports. 
(a)  All consumption-on-the-premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the city. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years, provided that the city clerk may authorize the disposal of records prior to the expiration of three years if the maintenance of such records is no longer required by the city. 
(b)  All consumption on the premises licensees shall file with the city clerk the following reports at the time and in the form prescribed by the city manager: 
(1)  Monthly on-premises consumption report. 
(2)  A certified copy of the licensee's monthly state sales tax report as filed with the state department of revenue for the period coinciding with the on-premises consumption report. 
(3)  Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-55. - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-56. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-105. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate identification. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 23-56. 
(e)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (c) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether this person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonable and prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification for sale of alcoholic beverages; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment, seller's duty to request proper identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 23-57. - Days sales prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law, provided, however, that, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the package sales by retailers of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day and Easter Sunday. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed by those licensed to make such sales on any election day. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-58. - Sales to intoxicated persons; gambling; disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  Adult entertainment. 
(1)  No holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued pursuant to this article shall knowingly allow any performance or entertainment or act on the licensed premises which, when applied to contemporary community standards, the dominant theme taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interests or is licentious or obscene. 
(2)  It shall be prohibited to permit on the premises so licensed any contest or form of entertainment which consists of the wetting or soaking of the upper torso of a female or the pelvic area of a male or female. 
(3)  No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall cause, suffer or permit any person to appear on its licensed premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, nor shall cause, suffer or permit any person to appear on its licensed premises in any such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any simulation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 23-59. - Containers, storage, illumination. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(c)  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-60. - Cleanliness of premises; inspections. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-61. - Drive-through sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage within the city by means of drive-through sale. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "drive-through sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages by any means that allows the customer to remain in their motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-62—23-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES TO AND BY UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 23-81. - Prohibited employment, exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the terms grocery stores or supermarkets shall include convenience stores. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 23-82. - Activity in grocery stores. 
For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store or similar establishment shall not constitute handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-83—23-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 23-101—23-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BREAKING PACKAGE OR DRINKING ON PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Breaking of packages or drinking of contents on premises prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

Sec. 23-121. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-122—23-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 23-141. - Eligibility for license—restricted. 
Any type consumption on the premises license may be granted only to a restaurant, as defined under section 23-142. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-142. - Same—restaurant. 
In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring consumption on the premises license, a restaurant shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments; 
(5)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(6)  Have a permanent seating capacity, at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 24 persons. 
(7)  Provide live entertainment, including, but not limited to, bands, orchestras, singers, dancers, actors, performers, musicians or related live entertainment no more than two days in any week. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-143. - Ratio of alcoholic, nonalcoholic sales. 
Should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not equal those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council after a hearing as provided for in section 23-55. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-144. - Statement of sales. 
In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 23-54, the city clerk may require that a licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-145. - Illumination of premises, location of sale restricted. 
(a)  All restaurants areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-146. - Prohibited activities by employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a restaurant to engage in the following: 
(1)  Dance or sit with customers on the premises while on duty status, including "breaks;" 
(2)  Allow any customer to purchase food or drink, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, for an employee while on duty status, including "break periods;" 
(3)  For an employee to consume or simulate the consumption of any alcoholic beverage while on duty status at the premises of his or her employer, including "breaks;" 
(4)  Require, permit, suffer, encourage or induce any employee or person to solicit at the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic; or money with which to purchase same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself, or for any other, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term "employee" shall also apply to performers, dancers, entertainers, musicians engaged in temporary work, as well as regular employees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-147. - Purchase of stock limited. 
Licensees under this article shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of one liter or larger unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such containers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-148. - Hours of sale. 
Consumption on the premises licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. Monday through Sunday, provided, however, that the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall also be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. Consumption licensees may permit alcoholic beverages purchased and served prior to 1:30 a.m. to be consumed on the premises until 2:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-149. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises. O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4; consumption of alcoholic beverage or possession of open container of alcoholic beverage in passenger area, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Sec. 23-150. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-151. - Brown bag establishments prohibited; exception. 
Brown bag establishments as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the city. However, any licensee for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises may allow customers to bring with them and consume on the licensed premises malt beverages and/or wine purchased from another location. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 23-153 and 23-154 below, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage establishment means any business authorized for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in broken packages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Security means any personnel privately employed for the task of monitoring and maintaining order and safety in any establishment or on any property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-153. - Maintenance of order at alcoholic beverage establishments and special events. 
The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment shall be responsible for monitoring their establishment - as well the parking lots and other outside areas around the establishment and for prohibiting disruptive, disorderly, and/or dangerous behavior, and for prohibiting patrons and other persons associated with the establishment or special event from standing, sitting, mingling, or assembling outside the licensed premises or the location or facility in a manner which causes or contributes to altercations, fights, other violent incidents, and/or illegal acts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-154. - Regulation of security at alcoholic beverage establishments. 
The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment who chooses to employ security at his or her establishment shall meet and adhere to all of the following requirements: 
(1)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment contracts with a private security business, any such private security business must be properly registered with and licensed by both the state and the city and meet and adhere to all standards and requirements set forth in the Georgia Private Detective and Security Agencies Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1, et seq. 
(2)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment provides in-house security, said owner and/or manager assumes full liability and responsibility for the security personnel, as they will be considered employees of the establishment or special event. 
(3)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment has in-house security personnel armed with a firearm, either concealed or unconcealed, while on-duty at the establishment, the owner, and/or manager is required to have the city police department complete a criminal background check on any such armed personnel. 
(4)  The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment shall maintain copies of any and all licenses and permits issued on behalf of their security personnel and shall make them available for review upon the request of any city police officer. 
(5)  The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment shall keep and maintain a record and log—which record and log shall be available for review upon the request of any city police officer—documenting the name, date, and time that each security personnel worked at their establishment or special event. 
(6)  All security personnel working at an alcoholic beverage establishment shall be uniform in appearance with one another and in a way that distinguishes them from other non-security personnel or employees. Uniforms must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The uniform must clearly identify the employee as either "in-house security" preceded by the establishment's or if outside security personnel are used, "security" preceded by the private security company name. 
b.  The uniforms cannot resemble those worn by city police officers. 
c.  No black in color security shirts are permitted. Shirts must be either green, yellow, or white with either white or black lettering. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-155—23-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-171. - Taxes imposed. 
In addition to the license fees required in this chapter and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all licensees hereunder shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Secs. 23-172—23-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 23-191. - Imposition. 
There is imposed upon the sale of mixed drinks in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the mixed drinks to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for the collecting of such taxes, provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 23-192. - Payment to city. 
(a)  Each licensee under this chapter shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the twentieth day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of each month, a return shall be filed with the city clerk for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. Returns shall be in such form as the city manager may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of mixed drinks and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 23-193—23-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 23-211. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the twentieth day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , § 1, 5-1-2018) 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; Levy of tax on wine authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 1991, § 12-101) 
Sec. 24-2. - Garbage collection systems. 
The city shall maintain a garbage collection service, which may be by contract with a private party. 
(Code 1991, § 12-102) 
Sec. 24-3. - Jurisdiction. 
No garbage shall be collected outside the city limits. 
(Code 1991, § 12-103) 
Sec. 24-4. - Hazardous materials. 
The city shall not collect for disposal any waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment. 
(Code 1991, § 12-104) 
Sec. 24-5. - Garbage containers required; placement and storage of refuse. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep garbage outside of any residence or building within the city limits except in containers proper for collection. Any accumulation of garbage not in a container is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. When such accumulation occurs, the mayor shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises in writing to remove the solid waste within seven days of the date of the notice. Failure to remove such accumulation within seven days of the date of the notice shall be a violation of this section punishable as for a misdemeanor. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation occurs. 
(1)  Containers. The city's designated contractor shall provide, free of charge, the first roll-type garbage container for each residence or establishment with application for garbage service. If it is necessary, extra containers may be obtained for an additional monthly fee, as determined by the current fee schedule in affect at the time such additional cart is provided. In the event a container is lost, stolen or intentionally damaged, the city or its designated carrier reserves the right to charge the customer the replacement cost of the container. 
(2)  Placement. On days designated as collection days for respective routes, the provided garbage containers shall be placed for collection in a convenient place near the street or alley for the removal of its contents by the garbage collector. Garbage containers shall not be place in the gutter, alley or street in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Storage. Except when taken to the curbside for scheduled collection, containers shall be consistently located in the rear or side yard. 
(Code 1991, § 12-105; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-105), 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 24-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-7. - Fees. 
Monthly fee for garbage collection and disposal shall be as follow: 
(1)  Residential pick up once a week ..... $20.00  first bin  $10.00  each additional bin 
(2)  Commercial pick up one a week ..... $27.50  per 96 light commercial bin  $70.00  per 4 yd. dumpster  $84.50  per 6 yd. dumpster  $95.50  per 8 yd. dumpster 
(Code 1991, § 12-107; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-106), 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-0006 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 24-8. - Removal of yard debris by city personnel or contractors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Load means 22 cubic yards of yard debris. 
Property owner means any individual or entity owning real property which is adjacent to a city right-of-way. 
Yard debris means and includes tree limbs, tree trunks, tree branches or cuttings, shrubs and bushes so long as the same do not exceed 12 feet in length and were removed from the yard area immediately surrounding the property owner's dwelling house. Yard debris shall not include solid waste, trash or other household garbage, nor shall yard debris include pine straw, grass clippings, or stumps. 
(b)  Removal of yard debris. 
(1)  Yard debris removal shall be at a time and in a manner prescribed by the department and as provided for hereinafter. The property owner shall place all yard debris in neat, separate piles immediately behind the city right-of-way which is adjacent to the road or street on which the property owner's dwelling house is situated. In no event shall yard debris be placed in the gutters or drainage ditches. At no time shall yard debris be placed in such a manner as to obstruct gutters, drains, walkways, streets or roads. All tree limbs, tree trunks and tree branches shall be placed with the butt ends in the same direction. 
(2)  The property owner shall contact the department to schedule the removal of yard debris. The department's agent shall inspect the yard debris and shall inform the property owner of the fee for removal, if any, as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. The department may refuse to remove any materials which do not constitute yard debris as defined in subsection (a) of this section and which have not been placed for removal by the property owner as provided for in this section. The department shall schedule the collection on a "first come first serve" basis. Free pickups are limited to one per quarter for each property owner. 
(3)  The department shall remove yard debris only from property which is adjacent to the city right-of-way and have a opened garbage service account with the city. 
(4)  The city will endeavor to have yard debris pickup on the second Wednesday of each month, although circumstances may dictate other schedules. 
(c)  Fee for yard debris removal. There shall be no charge for the removal of yard debris consisting of less than three cubic yards. Yard debris exceeding three cubic yards shall be charged on a per load basis. There shall be a fee for any load exceeding three cubic yards but less than ten cubic yards. There shall also be a fee for any load larger than ten cubic yards. The fee for any additional loads, regardless of size, shall be per load. These fee amounts shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. All payments due for yard debris removal shall be made in advance and shall be payable to the department. Yard debris removal will be scheduled by the department. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2009, § 12-107.1; Ord. No. 2016-0006 , § 1, 8-2-2016; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 24-9. - Billing; when due and payable. 
(a)  Against whom levied. Fees in accordance with the schedule set down in section 12-106 are levied against both the owner and/or occupant of premises served, but collecting from one shall relieve the other. 
(b)  Each person liable for such monthly garbage service charge shall be billed for service at the same time that the water/sewer bills are rendered each month. 
(c)  All bills for garbage service are due and payable upon receipt of utility bill. All bills not paid in full by the fifteenth of the month following billing shall be subject to a late fee charge of ten percent of the amount of such bill. Failure of the consumer to pay all amounts owing by the 20 th of the month following billing shall be subject to discontinuance of service. Delinquent service will be discontinued on the 21 st , or the first business day after. Bust must be paid in full, including $50.00 reconnect fee before service is restored. 
(Code 1991, § 12-108; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-107), 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-0006 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 24-10. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days or both at the discretion of the judge of the city court. 
(Code 1991, § 12-109; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-108), 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 24-11. - Collection of household goods; additional fee. 
The city employee will pick up normal household goods refuse upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Residence or establishment requesting household pickup service must have an opened garbage service account with the city for the location in which household pickup is requested. 
(2)  The additional charge for collection of household goods shall be paid in advance and the charge is determined by the current fee schedule in effect at the time such pickup is requested. The mayor and council may prescribe by ordinance changes to the fee schedule. 
(3)  City employees will not pick up and dispose of household goods unless items are placed in a convenient place for pickup near, but not upon, the city right-of-way. Whether or not the household items have been properly located will be in the sole discretion of the employees of the city. 
(4)  Household items placed outside and left for more than seven days with no request made by residence for pick up will be removed and charges for service will be billed to the utility account for that resident. 
(5)  The city will not pickup auto tires, junk autos, or discarded parts from junk autos. These items shall be disposed of by other means by the respective owner concerned. 
(6)  The city will endeavor to have household goods pickup on the second Wednesday of each month, although circumstances may dictate other schedules. 
(Code 1991, § 12-109; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-109), 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-0006 , § 1, 8-2-2016; Ord. No. 2017-002 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 24-12. - Collection of debris from repairs and/or construction. 
No debris from repairs, remodeling or construction will be moved by the city, but must be disposed of by the contractor, owner of the property or other person having such work done. 
(Code 1991, § 12-110; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1(12-110), 11-13-2012) 
Chapter 26 - STREETS, CURBS, AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

Sec. 26-1. - General regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance and repair of public streets; enforcement authority. All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the mayor and city council, which shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(b)  Maintenance of sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times and to remove from them all snow or ice within 12 hours from the time such snow or ice ceases to fall, or within less time if so ordered by the police chief or the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(d)  Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(e)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(f)  Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. 
(g)  Report of defects, obstructions, deposits, and discharges. It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the city to report the same to the mayor and city council as soon as possible. 
(h)  Private use. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(i)  Encroachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(j)  Openings. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk, or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the mayor and city council. 
(k)  Trees and shrubs. 
(1)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any public street, parkway, or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(3)  Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The mayor and city council may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(4)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(l)  Burning of leaves and rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 23-101) 
Sec. 26-2. - Street construction and improvements. 
(a)  Council resolution. Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and city council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resolution file with the city clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. The amount of the bond shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least forty inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(e)  Barricades. Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1991, § 23-102) 
State Law reference— Curb ramping for municipal streets, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-94. 
Sec. 26-3. - Excavations. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit, or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Excavation permit fee. The excavation permit fee to be collected by the city clerk shall be in an amount varying with the type of surface to be opened, dug, or excavated under the permit issued. The amount of the permit fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(c)  Surety bond. Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city clerk. The amount of the bond shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; and 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation permit or form which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore, and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the mayor and city council, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before said work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(d)  Routing of traffic. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants to the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the mayor and city council may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the mayor and city council and the police department. 
(2)  The permittee must notify the fire chief of any street so closed. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the mayor and city council and police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the police chief, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the mayor and city council will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are not existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the mayor and city council. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(e)  Clearance for fire equipment. The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(f)  Protection of traffic. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers, and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely; pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width, and length, together with necessary blocking, to assure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(g)  Interference with utilities. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the mayor and city council and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the bond of same shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric circuit, or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(h)  Protection of adjoining property. The permittee shall at all times, and at its own expense, preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner or, in the case of public property, the mayor and city council. 
(i)  Sidewalk excavations. Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(j)  Protective measures. The permittee shall erect such fence, railing, or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight, there shall be placed upon each place of excavation and upon any excavated materials, structures, or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstruction. 
(k)  Attractive nuisances. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation any machinery, equipment, or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(l)  Care of the excavated material. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(m)  Damage to existing improvements. All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code provision or ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the mayor and city council shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond therefor. 
(n)  Cleanup. As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the mayor and city council. From time to time, as may be ordered by said mayor and city council, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the mayor and city council, said work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for hereunder. 
(o)  Backfilling. Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(p)  Restoration of surface. 
(1)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the mayor and city council. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to assure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(2)  Permanent restoration of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the mayor and city council shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. 
(q)  City's right to restore surface. 
(1)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the mayor and city council, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(r)  Prompt completion of work. The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(s)  Emergency work. In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit, or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit, or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided. 
(t)  Noise, dust, and debris. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust, and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the mayor and city council or in case of an emergency as herein provided, any tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(u)  Inspections. The mayor and city council shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this section, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this section. 
(v)  Drawings. Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans, and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the director of public works with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes, or replacements are made. 
(w)  Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 23-103) 
Sec. 26-4. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb, or curb-cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee. The permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. When driveways, curbs, or curb-cuts are to be altered simultaneously, only one permit and fee shall be required. 
(c)  Bond. The mayor and city council shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit hereunder to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(d)  Standards for issuance of permit. The city clerk shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds: 
(1)  That the plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the mayor and city council, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)  That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)  That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  That the health, welfare, and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(e)  Supervision. All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1991, § 23-104) 
Sec. 26-5. - Procedure for the issuance of permits. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this municipality relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city clerk. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted. 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work. 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work. 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other date or plans as may reasonably be required by the city clerk or the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Permit fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee. The amount of the permit fee shall be as established by the mayor and city council from time to time. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(c)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward such application to the director of public works, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the mayor and city council shall return the same to the city clerk. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the mayor and city council, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(e)  Display of permit. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1991, § 23-105) 
Chapter 27 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1—27-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICATION TOWER REGULATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as §§ 27-31—27-40 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 27-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure shall mean man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the sitting of towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers in the city; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the city is minimal; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way to minimize the adverse visual impact to the city; 
(5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the county quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-33. - Aesthetics. 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas governed by this article. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping which will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color or colors that is identical to, or is closely comparable with, the supporting structure and/or surrounding area so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the zoning board may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-34. - General. 
(a)  Height limitations. The height limitations set forth in the section of the zoning ordinance as applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antenna. Towers and antenna shall be governed by the special use permit procedures set forth herein. 
(b)  Tower height threshold. These standards shall only be applicable to antenna and towers in excess of 35 feet in height. 
(c)  [Approval.] The city council may consider for approval a site plan specific request that is in substantial conformance with the requirements listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-35. - Special use permit. 
(a)  Special land use permit shall be required for all television, land mobile, communication, microwave, radio transmission antennae and towers. 
(b)  Federally licensed amateur radio antennas under 70 feet in height are exempt from special use permit requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-36. - Requirements. 
(a)  All towers and antennae in excess of 70 feet located in an industrial zone shall be set back according to front yard requirements stated in Table 7.1. Towers with trigger links shall be set back one-half the distance of the length of the tower when located in areas zoned general commercial and setback the full height of the tower if located in any residential or rural development zoned district. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application for a tower, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding topography, coverage zone, and tower height requirements. 
(c)  Shared usage of towers and antennae facilities is encouraged, and towers shall be designed to accommodate such uses. 
(d)  Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with operation of the antennae or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. 
(e)  All towers and antennae shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device such as a six-foot wall, fence or other appropriate devices to prevent unauthorized access. 
(f)  All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission or such governing agency guidelines as may be established by named agencies. 
(g)  At the time of application for a building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. Cost of engineering evaluation shall be the responsibility of the individual or corporation applying for the building permit. 
(h)  Applicants are required to explore and fully utilize existing tower and antennae space. 
(i)  Non-residential sites are encouraged for tower location where possible and use of platted lots in existing subdivisions are discouraged. 
(j)  In addition, all such towers and antennae shall be designed to minimize visual and scenic impact when located on slopes greater than 15 percent or on top of such slopes. 
(k)  Any tower approved under the provisions of this ordinance which is not utilized by any communications service provider for any communications related purpose for a period of 12 consecutive months shall lose any privilege of special use previously granted by the city council and must therefore be re-submitted for approval prior to use for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-37. - Co-location of antennas. 
(a)  Co-location. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunications antennas according to the following: 
(1)  For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
(2)  For towers greater than 150 feet in height the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Co-locating antennas on existing towers. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued is not required to apply for a special use permit. administrative approval by the zoning board may be granted upon proof that the tower is structurally capable of holding the antenna and submission of the following: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)  The tower's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the tower. 
(5)  The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(c)  Location of antennas on non-residential structures. Any person or entity locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around existing nonresidential structures is not required to apply for a special use permit, but shall be required to obtain administrative approval by the zoning board upon proof that the structure is capable of holding the antenna and related equipment and submission of the following: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity locating the antenna. 
(2)  The location and use of the structure being used to locate the antenna. 
(3)  Permission from structure's owner to locate antenna. 
(4)  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-38. - Landscape buffer/screening requirements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise noted within this section's requirements, or otherwise approved by the city council, any commercial tower or antennae which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 40 foot setback from the residential property, 15 feet of which shall be a landscaped, screening buffer between the tower and the residentially zoned property. 
NOTE: Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case where required buffers and setbacks are in conflict the more stringent shall apply. 
Additionally, necessary private utilities and/or access drives may be allowed through, over, or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over, or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan approved by the zoning board. 
(b)  Objectives. The above required landscape screening buffer shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
(1)  Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
(2)  Control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
(3)  Reduce glare; 
(4)  Buffer noise; and 
(5)  Establish privacy. 
(c)  Standards. The required landscape buffer/screening requirements are subject to review and approval by the zoning board in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Plantings are to be a mix of rows of evergreen trees and shrubs, deciduous trees and evergreens taller than the required five-foot minimum; 
(2)  Species are to be ecologically compatible to site and appropriate for design situation; 
(3)  Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide maximum visual barrier to adjoining properties and public streets; 
(4)  Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five feet for trees; 
(5)  Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(6)  Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner(s) to ensure that the above objectives and standards are met; 
(7)  When topography and existing conditions allow, the required landscape buffer should be undisturbed; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive and/or necessary utilities as shown on the site plan. 
(8)  Any appeals from a determination by the zoning board regarding the landscape buffer shall be considered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-39. - Action by county commission. 
(a)  Upon receipt of special use permit application there will be a public hearing regarding the special use and building permit. 
(b)  Public notification. Legal notice of the public hearing before the city council shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the legal advertisements of the city are published. 
The application advertisement shall include date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the date of the first hearing by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall approve or deny any special use permit request and require any conditions deemed necessary or appropriate to maintain safety, health, scenic value, and welfare of the city. Any special use permit for communications towers that is denied shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-40. - Standards for review. 
(a)  The city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve this proposed use: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower/fall zones; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures or uses which may be incompatible with the towers (such as private or public airports); 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(6)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(7)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures. 
(b)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers and structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Sec. 27-41. - Action by city staff. 
Upon approval by city council, the special use permit and building permit shall be issued upon receipt of the fee as assessed in compliance with the schedule posted in the clerk office of city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2016-0001 , § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 to 40-6-395 (except for §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394), and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-2-20 and 40-5-20, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city which like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in § 1-106. 
(Code 1991, § 11-101) 
Sec. 28-2. - Speed limits. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, and based upon the required engineering and traffic studies, the mayor and council may establish maximum speed limits on any street or portion of a street within the city in accord with the provisions of state law, and shall post traffic signs as required by state law on those particular streets or portions of a street giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit. 
Sec. 28-3. - Speed detection devices. 
Pursuant to Georgia Department of Transportation Permit No. 399, the city police department is authorized to use speed detection devices to enforce approved speed limits at locations specified in section 28-2. 
(Code 1991, § 11-103) 
Secs. 28-4—28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, adopted June 2, 2015, amended art. II, §§ 28-25—27-42 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1991, § 15-101. 

Sec. 28-25. - Establishment of parking restrictions in designated areas. 
(a)  Placement of signs. When an ordinance or regulation of the city so provides, the chief of police shall designate those streets or parts of streets in the city upon which parking shall be prohibited, or parking time limits established, or parking is otherwise restricted, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When such signs are erected and in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-26. - Signs required to regulate parking. 
Whenever by the provisions of this chapter or any other regulation of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited or restricted on designated streets or parts of streets, it shall be the duty of the department of public works, at the direction of the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-27. - Parking parallel, on right-hand of street unless otherwise indicated; exception for one-way streets. 
Except where otherwise indicated by appropriate signs, markings or other devices, all parking in the city shall be parallel to the curb, and along the right-hand side of the street facing in the direction of travel; provided, however, that upon one-way streets, vehicles may park along the left-hand side of the street facing in the direction of travel, unless such parking is otherwise prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-28. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
No motor vehicle shall be left standing on the streets of the city between sunset and sunrise unless there is displayed from the front and rear thereof appropriate illuminating devices. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-29. - Parking on sidewalk, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked on any sidewalk in the city any automobile, truck or motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-30. - Parking between curb and sidewalk adjacent to street, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked in that area between the curb and the sidewalk adjacent to any street in the city any automobile, truck or other motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-31. - Parking restrictions; city property; other restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile or motor vehicle on city property or within a city parking lot for more than 24 hours. This restriction shall not apply to city-owned vehicles. 
(b)  No motorized vehicle in excess of 7,000 pounds (empty weight), trailer, boat, vehicle not in operating condition or currently licensed, vehicle with more than four wheels or a total number of vehicles in excess of four shall be permitted to be parked in front of or at the side of the main dwelling on a lot in a residential area or neighborhood, unless same is parked or stored completely within an enclosed garage or roofed carport. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the limitation set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, no motorized vehicle in excess of 7,000 pounds (empty weight) or trailer, boat or vehicle with more than four wheels shall be permitted to be parked or left standing along any street or roadway in any residential zoned area or neighborhood. The provisions of this subparagraph (c) shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries of goods or merchandise to residents or businesses located in such residential zoned area or neighborhood or to vehicles temporarily parked for the purpose of loading or unloading household or business goods and furnishings (moving van type vehicles). 
(d)  Parking of a motor vehicle in front of or which blocks the entrance to a public alley or public or private driveway is prohibited. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any motorized vehicle to be parked within 30 feet of an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-32. - Fire lanes, police and handicapped parking zones; designated, use restricted. 
(a)  Unless expressly authorized, by permit or otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city where the curbing is marked by yellow lines. Excepted from the terms of this section are properly marked or licensed emergency or law enforcement vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated and marked as a fire or emergency lane, access or alleyway. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated as a handicapped zone unless identification as a handicapped vehicle is properly displayed. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated two hour parking for more than two hours. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated for law enforcement vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-33. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  Placement of signs. The department of public works shall, at the direction of the chief of police shall erect signs prohibiting parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not permit free and unobstructed passage of vehicles. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. Violations of this section shall be sentenced in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-34. - Enforcement of parking regulations. 
(a)  Scope of section. Any and all vehicles parked on any public street or alley in the city shall at all times be subject to the supervision and control of the police force of the city and any officer thereof. This section shall also apply to parking of vehicles in an area where the curbing is marked by yellow lines, in an area designated as fire or emergency lane or in an area designated as a handicapped zone. 
(b)  Duty of enforcement. It shall be the duty of every member of the police department of the city and/or employee clothed with police powers to exercise supervision and control over vehicles parked on the public streets or alleys in the city and to prohibit as far as possible parking that obstructs such streets or alleys. This duty shall apply to enforcement of the parking restrictions set forth in section 28-32; in addition, the chief of police and the fire chief shall have the duty and authority to issue citations for violations of the restrictions set forth therein. Reasonable discretion shall be exercised in the enforcement of this section. 
(c)  Obedience required. Every person who parks a vehicle on any public street or alley in the city shall park the vehicle subject to the supervision and control of the policeman and/or employees with police power in the city, and every such person shall, when requested or directed by any member of the police department and/or employee clothed with police powers, immediately move his automobile and park it in such place as shall be designated, or if a parking place is not designated to remove it from where it is parked at the time such owner is requested or directed to do so. 
(d)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to move any vehicle parked in the city on streets or alleys after requested or directed to move the vehicle by any member of the police department and/or any employee clothed with police powers. Violations of this section shall be sentenced in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-35. - Vehicle owner not to cause or permit parking violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to countenance, cause, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stop, stand or park upon any of the public streets or public places in the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-36. - Penalty for parking violations. 
(a)  The charge for violation of a two hour parking restriction in any designated parking area shall be $25.00 if the violation is paid within seven days of the issuance of the violation. If a violation is unpaid after seven days the fine shall be doubled. 
(b)  The charge for violation of a designated handicapped parking space shall be $50.00 if the violation is paid within seven days of the issuance of the violation. If a violation is unpaid after seven days the fine shall be doubled. 
(c)  Habitual offenders of parking regulations shall be assessed an additional charge of $50.00. Habitual offense shall be defined as conviction of five or more violations of subsection (d) of 28-34, section 28-38, section 28-39, or section 28-40 within a calendar year. The habitual offender charge shall be assessed to violators on the fifth and each subsequent violation during the calendar year. 
(d)  If the fine is not paid by the court appearance date and time listed on any citation for violation of any parking regulation, such person shall be required to appear in the municipal court and such person, if found guilty of willfully failing to pay the ticket within the prescribed time limit, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-37. - Towing away of certain illegally parked vehicles. 
Subject to state law requirements, the police chief is hereby authorized to tow away and store any vehicle parked in any of the following situations: 
(1)  In a two hour zone illegally for more than two hours and 30 minutes. 
(2)  In a designated handicapped space without proper authorization. 
(3)  In a city parking lot for more than 24 hours. 
(4)  On any roadway in accordance with state law requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-38. - Restricted parking. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to determine the location of restricted parking within the city limits. Parking restrictions shall be placed to optimize the use of parking facilities while maintaining adequate traffic flow and safety. 
(b)  The following types of restricted parking shall be allowed: 
(1)  Two hour zones. 
(2)  Handicapped spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-39. - No parking areas. 
(a)  LaGrange Street. No parking is permitted on LaGrange Street within the corporate limits of the city as described as follows: 
(1)  Beginning at the court square west to Williams Street there shall be no parking permitted on the north curb of LaGrange Street Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-40. - Handicapped parking—Law adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 28-1 of this Code and pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-220 through 40-6-227, such sections of state law are hereby incorporated in this section by reference as and for the handicapped parking laws of this city with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  The sign designations for handicapped parking places shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the failure of the property owner to properly mark and sign handicap parking places in accordance with law, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in any area on public or private property which has been clearly designated and reserved for use by handicapped persons in vehicles displaying a valid handicapped parking permit, unless such vehicle clearly displays a valid unexpired handicapped parking permit or unless there is attached to the vehicle a specifically designated license plate for disabled veterans or other disabled persons authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-222(d). 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-41. - Parking vehicle for purpose of repair or sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the public streets of the city for the purpose of making repairs on same. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not in use to be parked on the public streets of the city for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 28-42. - Illegally parked vehicles, owner/driver citation. 
For parking violations under this chapter, citation may issue to either the registered owner of the vehicle or the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Proof that the defendant was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle shall permit the trier of fact in its discretion to infer that such owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Such an inference may be rebutted if the owner of the vehicle: 
(1)  Testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; 
(2)  Presents to the court prior to the return dates established on the citation a certified copy of a police report showing that the vehicle had been reported to law enforcement as stolen prior to the alleged violation; or 
(3)  Submits to the court prior to the return date established on the citation a sworn notarized statement identifying the name of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-002 , § 1, 6-2-2015) 
Secs. 28-43—28-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOLF CARTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, adopted June 5, 2018, enacted provisions designated as §§ 29-1—29-9, however, to keep with the style of this Code, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 28-61—28-69 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 28-61. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance health, safety and general welfare of present and future citizens of the city. 
It has come to the attention of mayor and council that the use of motorized carts on city streets creates a potential traffic hazard for other vehicular traffic as well as a danger to the occupants of motorized carts. 
Therefore, the intent of this article is to regulate the use of motorized carts within the corporate limits of the city as authorized by O.C.G.A. 40-6-331. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motorized carts electric or gasoline-powered pleasure carts , commonly known as golf carts. These carts have not less than three wheels and cannot be operated typically at more than 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-63. - Operations and limitations. 
Motorized carts may be operated within the corporate limits of Greenville by: 
(1)  Operation of motorized carts in the city shall comply in every respect with the requirements of Georgia law, including, without limitations, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330 and 40-6-331, and all other statutory regulations applicable to vehicular traffic and safety equipment. 
(2)  Only persons possessing a valid driver's license or instruction permit issued by the state of Georgia, another state of the United States of America or an appropriate international agency shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the streets of the city. 
(3)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the sidewalks of the city. 
(4)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the follow streets within the city: LaGrange St, North Depot St, South and North Talbotton Street and Woodbury Hwy. 
(5)  Motorized carts shall be operated during daylight hours only except if such carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(6)  Motorized carts may cross streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation to access other streets at street intersections only. The specific streets and highways referenced include Highway 109, Highway 100, Highway 27, Highway 18/109 East and Spur 109 (Gay Rd). 
(7)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on or across any street for which the speed limit is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-64. - Registration. 
Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of Greenville, the cart must be registered and receive a decal from the court clerk signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of said cart to the court clerk's office and complete an application for registration of said cart. Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a decal to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible. There shall be a fee of $25.00 for such registration. The decal, issued, shall be non-transferable from the cart for which it is issued. The registration shall be effective for a period of five years. New owners must register a cart within ten business days within change of ownership at a cost of $25.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $25.00 transfer charge. 
Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of Greenville, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform with those standards and specifications adopted for slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such society's standard ASAE S276.1, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at a height of three to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-65. - Liability insurance coverage. 
Each person operating a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating a motorized cart should verify his or her coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-66. - Exception. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to any self-propelled, two-wheeled vehicle. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall apply to motorized carts operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-67. - Enforcement. 
The police department shall be charged with enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 28-68. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine for the first offense of not less than $35.00. For the second offense, $70.00. If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction of a second offense, the minimum fine shall be $150.00 and the owner's registration shall be revoked. If a registration is revoked, the owner shall pay a re-registration fee of $200.00. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following a third conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Chapter 29 - PUBLIC GATHERINGS 

Sec. 29-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of rules and regulation contained in this chapter is to provide for public health, safety and general welfare in the city, to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public right-of-way. Also, to ensure the safe and unimpaired use and enjoyment of public property in places open to the general public and otherwise to regulate and control the time, place and manner of activities that would otherwise threaten or impair the public health, safety and welfare in the city while also encouraging the exercise of the rights to free speech and assembly in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 29-2. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings set out herein: 
Group demonstration means any meeting demonstration, picket line rally or gathering of more than three people for a common purpose of having a tendency to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
Parade means any march, processions or motorcade consisting of 15 or more people animals or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets, sidewalks or other public areas within the city that will have a tendency to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
Public assembly or public demonstration means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of any person or group for a common cause that will have a tendency to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic on streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
Spontaneous event means an unplanned or unannounced gathering or people, animals in a parade or assembly which was not contemplated before hand. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 29-3. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in a public assembly or public demonstration or parade on public streets, sidewalks or other public property in an open pace to the general public for which a written permit has not been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to spontaneous events such as: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from classes/schools. 
(3)  Military forces of the state, law enforcers and fire divisions of the city/county. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 29-4. - Application. 
(a)  Any person conducting a parade or public assembly shall make written application to the chief of police, or his designee at least seven days prior to such event. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person and/or organization requesting the permit. 
(2)  The type of event, including a description of the activities planned. 
(3)  The date and time of the event. 
(4)  Other information deemed by the police chief or his designee that may seem reasonably in order to properly provide traffic control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 29-4. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall issue the permit within five days of receipt of the completed application after applying the following criteria: 
(1)  The event will not violate and will conform with applicable state regulation; 
(2)  The event is not a spontaneous event; 
(3)  The event will not interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  If an application is denied, the chief or his designee shall promptly attempt to call and shall mail a notice of his action to the applicant including the following: 
(1)  Reason for denial. 
(2)  Right to appeal the denial. 
(Ord.  No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 29-5. - Appeal process. 
(a)  In order to file an appeal, the individual or entity must have been the recipient of a decision of denial. 
(b)  Reason for appeal must be presented in writing. 
(c)  City officials will review all appeals and render final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Municipal water works. 
The municipal water works shall be under the immediate control and supervision of the mayor and city council, who shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of said water works. 
(Code 1991, § 21-101) 
Sec. 30-2. - Inspections. 
The mayor and city council, or their designated representative, may enter the premises of any water taker, at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters, and fixtures. 
(Code 1991, § 21-102) 
Sec. 30-3. - Application/deposit for water service. 
Water shall not be connected to any premises or structure without application having first been made and having been officially granted by the city clerk or assistant city clerk. Every application made must be in the owner of the property or the authorized lessee. The application must be made at the city hall and must include proof of ownership or a lease agreement. Application fees are as follows: 
(1)  Property owner deposit fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Authorized lessee deposit fee ..... 200.00 
(Code 1991, § 21-103; Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 30-4. - Tap fee for water and sewer service. 
Each consumer requiring a connection to subscribe and use water and sewer service of the city shall pay a tap fee at the following rates: 

 
These fees represent the cost of a short-side tap (when the main is on the same side as the customer). A long-side tap shall include the additional cost of boring under the right-of-way. Fees for larger taps shall be determined on a cost basis. On any lot where there is an existing tap or water meter, a customer may purchase an additional tap/water meter for irrigation purposes only at the rate of $200.00. 
(Code 1991, § 21-104; Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 21-104; Ord. No. 2014-001 , §1, 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 2016-003 , § 1, 6-7-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-003 , § 1, adopted June 7, 2016, changed the title of § 30-4 from "Charges for initial water and sewer service" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 30-5. - Water meters. 
Each building or structure using city water shall have a water meter. This meter will be installed by the city. The city shall install meters at or near the property line or at the city's option on the consumer's property, within three feet of the property line. 
(Code 1991, § 21-105) 
Sec. 30-6. - Service line regulations. 
No more than one residence or structure shall be permitted to use service line all service lines are to be of PVC schedule 40 or its equivalent no galvanized piping shall be used for service line. All service lines shall be installed at least 24 inches below the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1991, § 21-106) 
Sec. 30-7. - Water waste prohibition. 
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bath tubs and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated. 
(Code 1991, § 21-107) 
Sec. 30-8. - Sprinkling and water restrictions. 
(a)  Any condition which causes the normal supply of water and pressure to be reduced excessively requires that priority use of water be implemented. These conditions include any one of the following: 
(1)  High water demand. 
(2)  Drought and excessive heat conditions. 
(3)  Supply interruptions. 
(4)  Power failures. 
(5)  Water main breakage or failures. 
(b)  A general ranking of water uses in decreasing order of importance would be as follows: 
(1)  Household use. 
(2)  Public necessity. 
(3)  Livestock. 
(4)  Industry and commercial use. 
(5)  Construction. 
(6)  Irrigation. 
(7)  Nonessential firefighting. 
(8)  Swimming pools. 
(9)  Car washing. 
(10)  Street cleaning, line flushing, hydrant testing, lawn watering, etc. 
(c)  The city proposes to establish an emergency conservation plan as outlined in the following section which places restrictions on lower priority water uses during periods when water use reduction is urgent. The following subsections outline a drought/emergency conservation plan for the city. The plan is divided into four stages of emergency conditions. These are briefly described as minor, moderate, severe, and critical. 
(1)  Stage one, minor emergency condition. The city will, when minor conditions occur, first put the following priority conservation methods in place: 
a.  Public notices will be placed in places of business through out the city, and in the local newspaper requesting that customers curtail the use of any unnecessary water. This will be primarily aimed at limiting the practice of watering lawns, gardens, washing cars, and other practices that are not essential during emergency conditions. 
b.  In addition, fire departments and others will be asked to curtail water main flushing, dust control, and other nonessential use of water. This request made by the mayor under minor conditions shall be on a voluntary compliance basis. 
(2)  Stage two, moderate water emergency. If conditions degenerate from what was considered a minor condition to a moderate emergency, the following additional steps may be taken: 
a.  First, the posting of notices would increase and in the newspaper notice would include a release from the mayor explaining the degree of severity of the problem. The mayor will make a stronger appeal for voluntary reductions of water usage. 
b.  The same water reduction methods that were outlined in the minor emergency section will be implemented in the moderate section with the addition that city crews and in some cases, public safety officials will be asked to actually field monitor water usage. 
c.  If customers are observed using water for nonessential purposes, they will be contracted on site and asked to curtail water use. After two requests are made, if the customer fails to comply, his water service may be cut off at the meter and a reconnection fee may be charged to return the customer to service. 
(3)  Stage three, severe water emergency. In cases where the city deems conservation measures required being severe, the mayor as well as the city council will make appeals to customers of the system. In addition, news briefings will be sent to large users outlining the problem. A much more severe ban on water usage will be required, and prohibition of all public water usage not required for health and safety will be activated. The prohibition will allow no outside water usage that is not absolutely essential for health and safety. No water cooled air conditioners will be allowed to run without recirculation. Businesses such as car washes and laundromats will be asked to curtail operations for limited periods. High water using industries will be asked to curtail operations if they operate in more than one shift. The penalties for ignoring the water use warnings will result in shutoff of water service to the customer after one request. 
(4)  Stage four, critical water emergency. When the emergency becomes so severe that it is considered critical, measures implemented for a severe emergency will be continued along with additional measures. Prohibitions will be imposed on the use of any water for outside activities not essential or required for health and safety. Any business that is a high water user will be required to curtail operations for limited periods until the water emergency has subsided. The city may also issue a request that individual residents conserve in other specific ways. In addition to the personnel of the city, the police department will be asked to monitor unnecessary use of water. The city will take measures to reduce the pressure to the minimum permissible level in areas where it is possible to do so. As a last resort, the city will temporarily terminate service to selected portions of the system at alternate intervals. 
(Code 1991, § 21-108) 
Sec. 30-9. - Use during fire alarms. 
During all fire alarms, the use by persons other than municipal firefighters of hoses and other apparatuses maintaining a constant flow of water is absolutely forbidden. 
(Code 1991, § 21-109) 
Sec. 30-10. - Utilities rates. 
The water rates schedule for the city are as follows: 
(1)  Residential rates. 
a.  Demand charge (minimum) based on meter size. 

 
b.  Commodity charge. 

 
(2)  Commercial rates. 
a.  Bulk water sales. 

 
b.  Demand charge (minimum) based on meter size. 

 
c.  Commodity charge. 

 
(3)  The sewer service rates schedule for the city are as follows. 
a.  Demand charge (minimum) based on water meter size. 

 
b.  Commodity charge. 

 
(4)  The garbage service rates schedule for the city are as follow. 

 
(Code 1991, § 21-110; Mo. of 11-1-2008; Ord. No. 2016-004 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-004 , § 1, adopted August 2, 2016, changed the title of § 30-10 from "Water rates" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 30-11. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for non-payment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made and a service charge is paid for each meter reconnected. The service charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's policies. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficient water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1991, § 21-112) 
Sec. 30-12. - Charges for turning water on. 
If the water supply to any premises is turned off for any reason, a charge shall be made. The charge shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1991, § 21-113) 
Sec. 30-13. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any circumstances furnish water free of charge to anyone. All residence and commercial buildings within the city limits, not served by the city, but has city water and sewer adjacent to their property shall pay a minimum water and sewer demand fee. 
(Code 1991, § 21-114) 
Sec. 30-14. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line or sewer collection line to the property line when a water or sewer line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent to the property being served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 30-4, will be made. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable cost for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The city shall install its water meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. The meter and the service line between the water main and meter shall remain free of any obstructions that will hinder the reading of the meter and the repair of the service line. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to refuse service to any additional customers when capacity will not permit. 
(5)  Under normal circumstances, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 21-115) 
Sec. 30-15. - Consumer's responsibility and liability; complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  Consumer's responsibility and liability. Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the customer, members of his household and employees only, and the customer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water, except as hereinafter provided in section 30-10. Water shall not be used in a manner which would interfere with domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
a.  When a customer's meter is not located on the public right-of-way or within three feet of the customer's property line, the customer will be responsible for all repairs to that line except for the part on the public right-of-way. The city will maintain the meter. 
b.  If a customer does not wish to maintain all of the service line not on the public right-of-way, they should notify the city in writing and city employees will relocate the meter back to the right-of-way. 
(2)  The consumer shall have and maintain a private cut-off valve and dual check valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatuses, beyond the connection place provided by the city, shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  The consumer is liable for any negligent damage to the property of the water system located on their premises. 
(5)  In order to be received as a customer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must show that any and all wells located on their property are not physically connected to the city's water system (AWWA approved double check valves installed at the water meter on the customer's side will waive this requirement) and all applicants, by becoming customers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be customers of the city, they will not permit the drilling, boring and or connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. Customers must not connect the city's water system to any other form of water supply. Customers currently having an unapproved water source connected to their plumbing, upon notification will have to demonstrate its discontinuance or purchase and install an AWWA approved double check valve. 
a.  The customer shall furnish and have installed a double check valve-backflow preventer assembly in a size to match that of the required service piping. The DCV-BFP assembly shall include a full-port ball valve on the inlet and outlet sides and a union or swivel coupling nut between the device and each valve. Unions or swivel coupling nuts to be integral with the device or valves. The device shall have three ball valve test cocks in the vertical position fitted with brass or plastic threaded plugs. A fourth test cock shall be provided on the upstream side of the inlet shut-off valve. All components of the assembly, including the ball valve handles and assembly bolts, shall be equal in corrosion resistance to bronze or stainless steel, to resist electrolysis. Access to both checking devices shall be by top and/or side entry for maintenance and repair of all interior parts and shall have replaceable seats. 
b.  Approved assemblies: Ames, Buckner, Conbraco, Cla-Val Febco, Flowmatic, Hersey, Watts, Wilkins. 
c.  Installation instructions. The DCV-BFP assembly shall not be buried in earth but installed in a utility box adjacent to or as close as practical to, the outlet side of the meter installation. Under no condition will any connection be allowed between the service meter and a backflow preventer used for system containment. 
d.  Assembly testing. 
1.  All double check valve assemblies shall be tested annually by an approved certified tester. A copy of all test and maintenance repots must be maintained by the customer and submitted to the city upon request. 
2.  Thermal expansion; when water is heated and stored in a customer's water system, or branch of the system, that has been closed by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or any other checking device; an auxiliary relief valve, or expansion chamber should be installed to limit thermal expansion of water being heated to not more than 80 PSI static (no flow) pressure at any fixture on the system. 
(6)  Reference. Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-5-13. No person shall construct, maintain or operate a physical arrangement whereby a public water system is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a non-potable water system or non-permitted water system, sewer drain, conduit, pool storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains water, liquid, gasses, sewage or other waste of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as the results of backflow, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary, permanent or potential connections through which or because of which back-flow or back-siphonage could or would occur. 
a.  If one meter is currently serving several premises or dwelling units having a common owner, the landlord or owner shall be considered the city's customer and shall be billed accordingly. The meter size for this setting shall be no smaller than 1½ inches. 
b.  If one meter is currently serving several units or dwelling places and their is no common deeded or titled owner and the units have separate power and/or gas service, and individual piping, upon notification shall make application for water and sewer service with the city. Failure to do so within the specified time frame cited in the notification will result in the common meter being billed the appropriate demand and commodity charge times the number of units the meter is now serving. Continued disregard of the notification could result in the discontinuance of service. 
c.  Buildings or structures having a common piping system, but are individually owned, upon notification shall at their expense re-pipe their building so as not to be connected with any adjacent plumbing system. When re-piping is complete, the customer will notify city hall and meter and fee arrangements will be set by mayor and council. 
(b)  Complaints, adjustments. If the customer believes their bill to be in error, they shall present their claim, in person, to the utility clerk at city hall, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim if made after the bill becomes delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The customer may pay such bill under protest, and said payment shall not prejudice their claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of the customer. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the customer upon payment of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made for such test. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than city representatives, or if the meter fails to register correctly, or is stopped for any cause, the customer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of their previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(4)  These guidelines are for cases where the customer's water consumption is excessive resulting from a leak in the customer's line. 
a.  The customer is responsible for maintaining all of the water line from the point of exit from the water meter, except as cited in subsection (a)(1)a of this section. 
b.  Adjustments will not be allowed. 
c.  The city will notify the customer immediately following the reading period which reflects a usage increase of 100 percent (doubles) over the previous billing period. 
(Code 1991, §§ 21-116, 21-119) 
Sec. 30-16. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days notice must be given, in person or in writing, at city hall, to discontinue water and sewer service, or to change occupancy. 
(1)  In the event of sale of property to which water and/or sewer service is provided and payment for such service is in delinquent status, service to the seller shall not be provided at any new location, or if currently served at another location, such service shall be discontinued, until any delinquent bill is paid. 
(2)  A new owner of property to which water and/or sewer service had previously been provided shall apply for service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, failure to do so will make them liable for paying services (water and sewer) since the last meter reading. 
(3)  When a customer moves from one location to another and both are being served by the city, a transfer fee will be charged. The customer will only be billed for the combined consumption of the two meters. The transfer fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1991, § 21-117) 
Sec. 30-17. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Water meters shall be read on the 15th of each month, as nearly as possible, and bills shall be mailed no later than the first day of the succeeding month. 
(b)  The bill shall be deemed late after the 15th of the month and is subject to a penalty of ten percent of the due amount. 
(c)  The bill shall be delinquent and service may be discontinued if failure to pay by the 20th of the month. 
(d)  Any customer whose water service has been cut off or disconnected by the city will not have water service restored until that person's account is paid in full and a reconnection of service fee is paid. If payment is made after 3:00 p.m. on the 21st or any day afterward, service will not be restored until the following business day. The reconnection of service fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(e)  Any customer with three consecutive months of disconnect will be required to pay an additional deposit before service is restored, which amount shall be in addition to the deposit set in section 30-3. The additional deposit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1991, § 21-118; Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 30-18. - Bulk water sales. 
Bulk water sales will be by permit only; anyone taking water from a fire hydrant without a current permit will be pursued for theft under Georgia Statutes. 
(1)  Bulk water sales swimming pools. No water will be sold and/or transported via private tanker or fire truck until the consumer is in possession of a permit. Permits will be issued through city hall. Permits will be valid for the day of issue only. 
(2)  Permit fees. 
Hydrant hook up fee ..... $75.00 
Consumption fee, per 1,000 gallons ..... 7.00 
Initially, total gallons will have to be estimated. Upon connection to the hydrant, all bulk sales will be metered. 
(3)  Bulk sales others. All bulk sales customers are required to have a permit prior to filling their vehicle. Customers, who will fill their tanks several times in a one-day period, will be charged a hook up fee at the first use, any subsequent use that day will be billed only on quantity. The customer is to pick up the hydrant meter at each filling and return the meter after each filling is completed. 
(4)  Tanks, tanker truckers, seed spraying trucks, and other containers (fire trucks excluded) that will be filled with water obtained under the fire hydrant use permit (bulk sales) must be inspected and approved by the city's representative. Approval will require an air gap or reduced pressure zone back flow prevention device prior to a permit being issued. (See illustration for approved filling methods.) 
(Code 1991, § 21-120; Ord. No. 2016-002 , § 1, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 30-19. - Damaging, injuring, or interfering with water or sewer system; unauthorized receipt of services. 
(a)  Any person who acts: 
(1)  Intentionally, and without authority, to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus of the city water system or city sewer system; 
(2)  Intentionally, and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)  In any way to interfere with the proper action of officers and employees of the city water system or city sewer system; 
(4)  Intentionally to divert any services to another person who knowingly receives the benefit of such services without proper charge; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally, and without authority, uses or receives the benefit, without consent of the city, of any utility services; 
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(b)  Any person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of any utility service offered or provided by the city water system or city sewer system, without proper charge, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person in lawful possession of the premises receiving the benefit of service without proper charge as a result of improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(d)  In addition to any fine or imprisonment authorized by this section, upon conviction, a violator shall be ordered to pay restitution to the city in the amount found by the court for rates, fees or other charges avoided by the violator's action and for equipment or property of the city or the city's water system or sewer system damaged or destroyed by such action. 
(Code 1991, § 21-121; Ord. of 4-13-2010, § 12-121) 
Sec. 30-20. - Emergency actions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide procedures to handle any emergency which endangers the waters of the state. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consistently exceeding an effluent limitation means a POTW exceeding the 30 day average limit for biochemical oxygen demand or total suspended solids for at least five days out of each seven day period during a total period of 180 consecutive days. 
Major spill means: 
(1)  The discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state by a POTW that exceeds the weekly average permitted effluent limit for biochemical oxygen demand (five-day) or total suspended solids by 50 percent or greater for any one day. 
(2)  Any discharge of raw sewage that: 
a.  Is in excess of 10,000 gallons; or 
b.  Results in water quality violations in the waters of the state. 
Spill means any discharge of raw sewage by a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to the waters of the state. 
(c)  Notice concerning endangering waters of the state. Whenever, because of an accident or otherwise, any toxic or taste- and color-producing substance, or any other substance which would endanger downstream users of the waters of the state or would damage property, is discharged into such waters, or is so placed that it might flow, be washed, or fall into them, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of such substances at the time to forthwith notify the division in person or by telephone of the location and nature of the danger, and it shall be such person's further duty to immediately take all reasonable and necessary steps to prevent injury to property and downstream users of said water. The following specific requirements shall apply to POTWs: 
(1)  The owner of a POTW shall immediately notify the division, in person or by telephone, when a spill or a major spill occurs in the system. Within five days of the incident, the owner of the POTW shall submit a written report to the division which includes, at a minimum, the information required in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(2)  The owner of a POTW responsible for a major spill shall publish a notice of the major spill in the legal organ of the county where the incident occurred. The notice shall be published within seven days after the date of the major spill. The notice as a minimum shall include the following: 
a.  Date of the major spill 
b.  Location and cause of major spill 
c.  Estimated volume discharged and name of receiving waters 
d.  Corrective action taken to mitigate or reduce the adverse effects of the major spill. 
(3)  The owner of a POTW shall immediately establish a monitoring program of the waters affected by a major spill or by consistently exceeding an effluent limit, with such monitoring being at the expense of the POTW for at least one year. The monitoring program shall include an upstream sampling point as well as sufficient downstream locations to accurately characterize the impact of the major spill or the consistent exceedance of effluent limitations as described in subsection (b) of this section. As a minimum, the following parameters shall be monitored in the receiving stream: 
a.  Dissolved oxygen. 
b.  Fecal coliform bacteria. 
c.  pH. 
d.  Temperature. 
The monitoring and reporting frequency as well as the need to monitor additional parameters, will be determined by the division. The results of the monitoring will be provided by the POTW owner to the division and all downstream public agencies using the affected waters as a source of a public water supply. 
(4)  The division and the owner of a POTW will provide notice of a major spill within 24-hours of becoming aware of the major spill to every county, municipality or other public agency whose public water supply is within a distance of 20 miles downstream and to any others which could potentially be affected by the major spill. 
(5)  The owner of a POTW responsible for a spill or a major spill shall report the incident to the local media (television, radio and print media) within 24 hours of becoming aware of the incident. The report shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Date of the spill or major spill. 
b.  Location and cause of spill or major spill. 
c.  Estimated volume discharged and name of receiving waters. 
d.  Corrective action taken to mitigate or reduce the adverse effects of the spill or major spill. 
(6)  The owner of a POTW responsible for a spill or a major spill shall immediately report the incident to the local health department(s) for the area affected by the incident. The report shall include, at a minimum, the same information required in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(7)  The owner of a POTW responsible for a spill or a major spill shall immediately post a notice as close as possible to where the spill or major spill occurred and where the spill or major spill entered state waters. The notice shall include, at a minimum, the same information required in subsection (c)(5) of this section. The intent of this requirement is for the POTW to notify citizens, who may come into contact with the affected water, that the spill or the major spill has occurred. The owner shall also post additional notices of the spill or major spill along the portions of the waterway affected by the incident (i.e., at bridge crossings, trails, boat ramps, recreational areas, and other points of public access to the affected waterway). These notices shall remain in place for a minimum of seven days after the spill or major spill has ceased. 
(d)  Noncompliance notification. If, for any reason, the permittee does not comply with, or will be unable to comply with any effluent limitations specified in the permittee's NPDES permit, the permittee shall provide the division with an oral report within 24 hours from the time the permittee becomes aware of the circumstances followed by a written report within five days of becoming aware of such condition. The written submission shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the noncompliance and its cause; and 
(2)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times; or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue, and steps being taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncomplying discharge. 
(e)  Emergency orders. The director shall have the authority to issue an emergency order pursuant to section 20 of the Act, and section 17(a) of the Executive Reorganization Act of 1972, as amended. 
(f)  Effective date. This rule shall become effective 20 days after filing with the secretary of state's office. 
Editor's note— Authority: O.C.G.A. Section 12-5-20 et. seq. Administrative History. Original Rule entitled "Emergency Actions" was filed on June 10, 1984; effective June 30, 1974. Amended: F. Apr. 3, 1990; eff. Apr. 23, 1990. Amended: E.R. 391-3-6 was filed May. 1, 1996, eff. April 25, 1996, the date of adoption to remain in effect for a period of 120 days or until the effective date of a permanent Rule covering the same subject matter superseding this ER, as specified by the Agency. Amended: F. July 10, 1996. Eff. July 30, 1996. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-6-.05. 
Secs. 30-21—30-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWERAGE 

Sec. 30-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial waste means the liquid waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period or duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of sewage works and/or of water pollution control of the city or his authorized agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1991, § 22-101) 
Sec. 30-47. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line and access available over public land. 
(Code 1991, § 22-102) 
Sec. 30-48. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provision of section 30-47(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The permit and inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection which inspection shall be made within 48 hours (Saturdays and Sundays excluded) of the receipt of notice by a representative of the city. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the county. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Within 60 days of the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal filters shall be filled with suitable material and abandoned. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. 
(Code 1991, § 22-103) 
Sec. 30-49. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on forms furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The permit and inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, the methods used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench for building sewers shall all conform to the building code, plumbing code and all other regulations of the city. In cases of conflict and in absence of other provisions, materials and procedures set forth in ASCE-WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall govern. All joints of the building sewer shall be tight and waterproof. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or its representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. Construction shall comply with the provisions of PL 91-596, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. 
(l)  When sewer service is required beyond the existing sewer line, the cost of extending sewer service to the customer's property line at the location of the installation of the stub shall be charged to the customer. 
(m)  A customer requesting service beyond the existing sewer lines shall pay the cost of the line necessary to serve such customer. The city may, at its option, increase the size of the line, and the city will pay for the differences in the cost of the material for increasing the size above that required to serve the customer or customers making such request. 
(Code 1991, § 22-104) 
Sec. 30-50. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers. 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanide in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor with temperature or in quantity to cause treatment works influent to exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting in excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such material. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause. 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). Maximum suspended solids discharges shall not exceed 350 mg/l. 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. Maximum BOD 5 discharged shall not exceed 300 mg/l. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the waste; 
(2)  Require the pretreatment of incompatible or toxic wastes, to an acceptable condition, so that the receiving plant may comply with the United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations as published in 40 CFR 403 before those wastes are discharged to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (j) of this section. 
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manholes, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be construed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(j)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1991, § 22-105) 
Sec. 30-51. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer works. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1991, § 22-106) 
Sec. 30-52. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The building inspector or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The building inspector or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the building inspector or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 30-50(h). 
(c)  The building inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1991, § 22-107) 
Sec. 30-53. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 30-49 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense. Each day in which any such violation shall continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violence. 
(d)  A failure of the property owner to connect to the sewer service line within the specified time shall authorize the city to discontinue water service to the premises in addition to the penalties otherwise provided for the violation of this article. 
(Code 1991, § 22-108) 
Sec. 30-54. - Damaging, injuring, or interfering with sewer system; unauthorized receipt of services. 
(a)  Any person who acts: 
(1)  Intentionally, and without authority, to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus of the city sewer system; 
(2)  Intentionally, and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)  In any way to interfere with the proper action of officers and employees of the city sewer system; 
(4)  Intentionally to divert any services to another person who knowingly receives the benefit of such services without proper charge; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally, and without authority, uses or receives the benefit, without consent of the city, of any utility services; 
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-6. 
(b)  Any person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of any utility service offered or provided by the city sewer system, without proper charge, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person in lawful possession of the premises receiving the benefit of service without proper charge as a result of improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(d)  In addition to any fine or imprisonment authorized by this section, upon conviction, a violator shall be ordered to pay restitution to the city in the amount found by the court for rates, fees or other charges avoided by the violator's action and for equipment or property of the city or its sewer system damaged or destroyed by such action. 
(Code 1991, § 22-109; Ord. of 4-13-2010, § 22-109) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
City of Greenville 
Adopted the 11 Day of March, 2002 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Zoning Ordinance of the city, enacted on March 11, 2002, as adopted and amended by the City Council. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2. 

[ARTICLE 1. - TITLE] 
An Ordinance of the City of Greenville, Georgia, regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the use of buildings, and land for business, industry, residence, public activities and other purposes; and for dividing the incorporated area into districts for such purposes and establishing boundaries; providing for a Planning Commission, defining its power and duties; the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and repealing conflicting resolutions. 
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE 

2.1. - [Purpose.] 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in the City of Greenville, Georgia. The zoning regulations and districts herein established are designed to: 
•  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
•  Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
•  Promote health, and general welfare; 
•  Provide adequate light and air; 
•  Avoid undue concentration of the population; 
•  Provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
•  Conserve the value of the economy; 
•  Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures; 
•  Promote quality of life for all citizens; 
•  Provide consistency with Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.2. - [Minimum Requirements.] 
The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the respective decision making authority will normally strive for quality developments which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
2.3. - [Comprehensive Plan Adopted.] 
By this section, the Comprehensive Plan adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Greenville is established as the official policy of the City concerning land uses. The incorporated areas of the City are divided into land use categories consistent with the Future Land Use Plan in the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the City, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan shall be updated on an as needed basis to reflect changes in land use and to discover any inconsistencies zoning changes have caused in the Future Land Use map. 
2.4. - [Update of Land Use Element of Comprehensive Plan.] 
The Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan shall be updated as needed or as required by law. This update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. This update shall also be used as policy in the City's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or text of the zoning ordinance. All amendments to the City of Greenville's Comprehensive Plan shall be in accordance with the Minimum Planning Standards and Procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Resolution, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes the "structure," the word "may" is permissive and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
1.  Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. 
2.  Accessory Building. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main buildings. Accessory buildings are not considered to be the primary building on the site. 
3.  Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
4.  Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
5.  Alteration of building. Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls or partitions, beams, columns, girders) except such changes as may be required for its safety; an addition to or reduction of a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or a building from one location to another; or any change in the roof or the exterior walls. 
6.  Apartment. See Dwelling, Multi-Family. 
7.  Apartment, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
8.  Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
9.  Basement. The area below the first floor level in a building, having not more than one-half (½) of its height above grade. 
10.  Bed and Breakfast Facilities. A residential Bed and Breakfast is a structure occupied by its owner(s) of record, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only are provided to guests for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the Bed and Breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator(s) and said operator(s) shall live in the structure when the Bed and Breakfast is in operation. 
11.  Buffer Area or Buffer Strip. 
A.  Berm. A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound. The mound is usually two to eight feet high and is used to shield, screen and buffer undesirable views and to separate incompatible land uses. 
B.  Screen. A landscaped open area unoccupied by structures and facilities except as permitted by this ordinance and/or in some instances as specified, a screen of shrubs, trees or similar plants at least eight (8) feet in height and dense enough to establish interrupted vision from one side to the other may be required. Both are established to separate different and possibly incompatible types of land use. 
12.  Boarding House. A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement, meals and/or lodging are provided for three (3) or more guest, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons in a residential zone. 
13.  Building. Any roofed structure designed, built, or intended for shelter, support, housing, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
14.  Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building excluding chimneys or steeples. 
15.  Building Line. The line, parallel to the street right-of-way line, which represents distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street centerline, equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
16.  Building, Principal. A building or structure where the use of the building or structure is consistent with the use permitted in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. In any residential zoned district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building of the lot or parcel. 
17.  Certificate of Occupancy. Issued by the Building Inspector certifying that the structure complies with the Southern Standard Building Code, all building inspection requirements and all sections of this Ordinance including but not limited to Section 5-3 and Section 18.13—18.15. 
18.  Child Care Center. Agencies, organizations or individuals which render service on a regular basis, with or without remuneration, in the form of providing day time care, boarding, feeding, supervising, or tutoring to children who are not members of the family, foster children, or legal wards of the attendant, including day nurseries, kindergartens, nursery schools, and similar services. This definition does not include tax-supported public schools. 
Home Child Care. Limited to six or less children and shall be registered with the State of Georgia. Child Care Homes shall be considered a home occupation and shall be accordance with those regulations. Child care homes, however, shall be exempt from the 25% floor space requirement set forth in Article 8. Also, child care homes are required to have a fenced yard of sufficient area and height to accommodate the maximum of six children regardless of the number of children enrolled in the program. 
Group Child Care. The number of children allowed in group child care is seven to nineteen. This child care group is required to be licensed by the State of Georgia and is not considered a home occupation. These child care structures shall be located in limited or general commercial zoned districts. 
Child Care Facility. The number of children allowed in a child care facility is nineteen or more. This facility shall be licensed by the State of Georgia and located in general commercial zoned districts. 
19.  Church. A building, structure or group of buildings in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
20.  Clinic. A facility where medical and dental patients, who are not normally lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or a group of physicians practicing activities invasive to the human body either by penetrating the skin or through any orifice or through the use of colonics. 
21.  Club or Lodge. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other legally established group of persons for social, fraternal, civic, cultural, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes on a non-profit basis operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
22.  Common Driveway. A driveway used by more than one dwelling or structure and at least twelve feet in width where any common use occurs. Common use occurs on those portions of a driveway which must be traveled by users of two dwellings of structures for ingress and egress. 
23.  Comprehensive Land Use Plan. A comprehensive, long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities, and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
24.  Conditional Zoning. The imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks, operation times and other non-use requirements, physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. 
a.  Conditional Use. Conditional use is the imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application that allows a secondary use in a district with another primary use. 
25.  Condominium. A building containing three (3) or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly-owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. 
26.  Convenience Food Store with Self-Service Fuel Sales. Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, pre-packaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. Further there shall be no automotive repairs done on site. 
27.  Day Nursery. See Child Care Center. 
28.  Deck. A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
29.  Deed Restrictions/Private Covenants. Private stipulations, usually pertaining to residential subdivisions which govern lot size, minimum floor area, uses permitted and in some instances architectural design. These may be stricter or not as strict as provisions included in the zoning. In cases where private deed restrictions or covenants are not as strict as zoning regulations the zoning regulations shall be the governing standard. 
30.  Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential area, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. Unless otherwise stated, density figures are to be in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets or other public lands. 
31.  Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). Public or private development which because of its location, scale, land use type or public service demand or any combination could affect the growth, development and quality of life of the region. 
32.  Developer. Any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property and engages in building, alteration of land, building, structure. 
33.  District. A section of the City of Greenville within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
34.  Drainage. A general term applied to the storage or conveyance of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping. 
35.  Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer while consumer remains inside a vehicle. 
36.  Duplex. A residential structure designed for two-family occupancy with each family in a separate dwelling unit, using separate cooking facilities. 
37.  Dwelling. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation purposes, including single family, two (2) family, multiple family dwellings and manufactured housing, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding houses. 
a.  Dwelling, Single-Family. Detached dwelling, containing not more than one dwelling unit, designed or occupied exclusively by a single family. 
b.  Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for three (3) or more adjoining-dwelling units, occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of one another, with each dwelling unit having a party wall and/or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure. 
c.  Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed, constructed, altered, or used for two (2) adjoining dwelling units, joined by common wall or common floor and occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other, using two cooking facilities. Includes "Duplex." 
d.  Loft, Dwelling. An upper story or attic directly under the roof, designed for use by a single family and located in a structure with a non-residential primary use. 
38.  Dwelling Unit. A building or portion thereof providing complete living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit, using one cooking facility, excluding hotels, motels or boarding houses. 
39.  Easement. A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for right-of-way, limited or specified purposes. 
40.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land-disturbing activity. 
41.  Existing Grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
42.  Fabricating. The process of assembling, using standardized parts. 
43.  Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons, occupying a single dwelling unit, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than three (3) persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit and using one common cooking facility. The term "family" does not include any organizational or institutional groups such as those occupying a lodging house, hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house, etc. 
44.  Floor Area. Total number of heated square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls of the several floors of a structure. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
45.  Floor Area Ratio. The gross floor area of a building or structure on a lot divided by the total lot area. Floor does not include area within parking structures. 

 
46.  Frontage. The side of a lot abutting a street. 
47.  Garage, Mechanical/Repair. Building(s) and premises designed or used for the purpose of providing the services of maintenance, minor repair, washing, adjusting, and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles provided that the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. A mechanical garage which provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale or repair shall be classified as a junk yard. 
48.  Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a principal building owned or operated by the occupants of the primary building, used only for private storage of permitted motor vehicles. 
49.  Hardship. A condition which shall be considered to exist only when one or more of the following apply to a particular piece of property and such condition has not been created by the applicant's own acts. 
a.  The owner cannot comply with the provisions of this Ordinance without violating some other resolution or section(s) of this Ordinance. 
b.  The topography of the land or shape of a particular lot precludes a conforming use. 
50.  Heavy Manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with antipollution standards established by the state and county. 
51.  Home Occupation. An occupation or profession for gain or support conducted entirely within a single family dwelling and which is carried on solely by a member or members of the family residing on the premises and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The occupation/business may require access by the public. 
52.  Hospital. An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. Also, including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences. All hospitals shall be authorized by Georgia Law. 
53.  Hotel. A building in which overnight accommodations are provided for ten (10) or more individuals of the general public for compensation and in which provisions for cooking are made in a central kitchen and not in the individual rooms or suites and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. 
54.  Industrial Park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a park-like setting for industrial establishments. 
55.  Industrialized Building. A term used only in Georgia, "industrialized building" replaces the now obsolete term "Factory-Built Housing," and describes certain manufactured housing which is regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines Industrialized Building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof". Industrialized Buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act", Georgia Law 1982 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the District in which it is located. This term includes "modular homes". 
56.  Infill. The development of new housing or other buildings on scattered vacant sites in a built-up area. 
57.  Institution. Premises occupied by a non-profit corporation or non-profit establishment for public use. 
58.  Intermediate Regional Flood (IRF). A one-hundred year frequency flood, as defined on flood hazard maps, which has a probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
59.  Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris including but not limited to junk vehicle, junk vehicle parts, discarded appliances, and other mechanicals, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. 
60.  Junk Vehicles. Any vehicle that cannot be moved by its own power or does not have an updated license plate. 
61.  Junk Yard. A lot or parcel, whether enclosed or not, used for the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvage house wrecking, and structural steel material and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of three (3) or more junk vehicles, or other machinery, appliances or parts of appliances. 
Storage Area. Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage of inoperable vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration, or sale, but not including exterior displays of new or used merchandise in operable condition for retail or wholesale distribution, when fenced and provided it is not a junkyard. 
62.  Kennels. Facility for the boarding (overnight) of domestic animals, limited to five or more dogs and cats four months of age or older. Breeding and training of dogs and cats and the sale to the public of puppies and kittens is classified as a kennel activity. 
63.  Land Use Plan. A professionally prepared and formally adopted document and map depicting the desirable future location of residential, commercial, public, and industrial land uses and thoroughfares. 
64.  Land Area per Dwelling Unit. The amount of land in square feet required for each dwelling unit permitted on a zoning lot. 
65.  Landscaping. The addition of lawns, trees, plants, shrubs or other natural and/or decorative features to land. 
66.  Light Industry. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
67.  Light Manufacturing. An establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed in the permitted use Table 6.3, shall not be permitted. 
68.  Lot. An unsubdivided parcel or portion of land varying in size, described as a single unit of property and held in single ownership by one person or in common ownership by more than one person. This land is or intended to be occupied by a particular use or occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a particular use or interest; together with the customary accessory buildings and uses and open spaces belonging to same. This land has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the uses proposed for the tract of land, having its principal frontage upon a city street, thoroughfare, state highway or a dedicated easement for ingress and egress on record in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. The term "lot" includes the term "plot," "parcel," and shall mean the same as "zoning lot"; however, the term "lot" shall not be construed to mean "land lot." 
69.  Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
70.  Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
71.  Lot Line. 
Adjacent. A lot or parcel of land sharing all or part of a common lot line with another parcel or lot. 
Front. The front line of an interior lot separating the lot from the frontage street right-of-way; across which the primary access to the property passes and which shall be used to identify the street address of the property in question. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front. 
Rear. The lot line generally opposite the lot line along the frontage of the lot and intersects the side lot lines. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line not less than ten feet long lying wholly within the lot farthest from the front lot line. 
Side. Any property line not designated as front or rear. 
72.  Lot of Record. An area designated as a separate and distinct lot or parcel of land which has been lawfully recorded by subdivision plat or deed on the public records of Meriwether County, Georgia, on or before the date of adoption of the original zoning ordinance. 
73.  Manufactured Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
74.  Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing units are defined as single-family dwellings if all requirements, as set forth in Article 6.2 Appearances Standards of this ordinance are met. 
75.  Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park). A lot, or parcel of land or place where three (3) or more manufactured homes are parked for residential purposes, or where space is set aside and offered for rent for manufactured homes. Lots consist of appropriate and adequate community services, recreational facilities, utilities, streets and sidewalks provided by the developer. 
76.  Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. 
77.  Modular Home or Building. A factory-fabricated single-family dwelling which is constructed in one (1) or more sections and is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of community affairs. Each modular home must meet the standards of an industrialized building of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and must bear the seal of approval as issued by the Georgia Commissioner of Community Affairs. 
78.  Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, offered to the general public for compensation, having separate entrances for each room or suite of rooms, and for which automobile parking is provided for each room or suite of rooms. To be used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge." 
79.  Mini-Warehouse. A building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any commercial use. 
80.  Non-Conforming Use. Any building, structure, or land use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of Zoning Ordinance or subsequently amended thereto and which does not conform, after the passage of such ordinance and/or amendments, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
81.  Official Zoning Map. A map officially adopted by the governing body of a political jurisdiction which illustrates the various zoning districts of the jurisdiction. 
82.  Open Space. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways, setbacks or off-street parking, but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
83.  Owner. The person in whom is vested the fee simple title or record, or a vendee under contract or purchase agreement. If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding shares; and any agent of the owner, including a developer. The term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of property. 
84.  Overlay. A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements beyond those required by the underlying zone. 
85.  Parcel. See Lot. 
86.  Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, or corporation, or any other legal entity capable of ownership. 
87.  Personal Care Home. A residence providing the protective care of residents who do not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility for safety of the resident while inside the building and may include daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness for intervention in the event of a resident experiencing a crisis, supervision in the areas of nutrition and medication, and the actual provision of transient medical care. 
1.  Personal Care Home, Congregate. Means a home for adults which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
2.  Personal Care Home, Family. A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character an appearance, which offers care to two through six persons. 
3.  Personal Care Home, Group. Means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character and appearance, which offers care to seven (7) through sixteen (16) persons. 
89.  Planned Development. An area to be planned and developed as single entity, according to applicable standards and regulations and containing one or more structures as a single project. Planned developments may consist primarily of either commercial, industrial, residential or with incidental accessory activities, or they may contain some combination of those primary uses. 
90.  Planning Commission. The City of Greenville Planning and Zoning Commission. 
91.  Plat, Final. A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording of that subdivision in accordance with the Plat Laws of the State of Georgia. 
92.  Plat, Preliminary. A tentative subdivision plat, indicating approximate proposed layout of a subdivision submitted with supporting documentation as necessary for consideration and approval prior to preparation of the final plat. 
93.  Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of presents owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by any County, City or other public agency. 
94.  Professional Office. Structure wherein services derived from the practice of recognized profession, such as predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations including but not limited to attorneys, medical, optical, audiology, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stock broker, architect, engineer, manufacture representative, professional counseling, dental, investigative services, photography, insurance, contractor, land surveyor, telephone sales, political campaign, veterinary medicine, travel bureaus. 
95.  Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle or portable structure transportable on a mobile chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling. It includes travel trailers, motorized dwellings, pop-up campers, pickup campers, coaches, and other similar recreational equipment. 
96.  Remodeling. To construct an addition or alter the design or layout of a building or make substantial repairs or alterations so that a change or modification of the entrance facilities, toilet facilities, or vertical access facilities is achieved. 
97.  Restaurant. An establishment where food is sold for consumption on the premises. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
98.  Secondary Detached Residence. A subordinate building on the same lot with the main building which is used, designed, or intended for dwelling purposes, such as guest houses and employee quarters, including tenant dwellings, but not including any dwelling which is rented, leased, or occupied by anyone other than the occupant of the main building or his guests, immediate family, or employees. 
99.  Salvage Operation/Salvage Yard. For the purpose of this ordinance, a "salvage operation" or "salvage yard" is a business the principal activity of which is buying, selling, exchanging, storing, sorting, packing, or dismantling of waste, used or secondhand material or three (3) or more inoperable vehicles or parts of thereof to consumers for personal use with only incidental residual transfer on a non-retail basis. A commercial recycling operation or junk yard as defined in this section, are engaged in salvage operations. 
100.  School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
101.  Service Station. Any building or land used primarily for the dispensing, servicing, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, grease, batteries, tires, or general automotive accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automobile repairs, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
102.  Setback. A required open space on a lot or parcel of land upon which structures are to be separated from the boundary line of the lot on which they are located is erected except as permitted by this Ordinance and is the shortest distance measured by a perpendicular line from the lot line or centerline of a street, highway or road and the nearest load bearing wall of the principal building or structure on a lot, load bearing walls do not include cornices, steps, open terraces, open entrance hoods, and other similar appurtenances which do not project more than six feet (6') from the building. This area is bounded by property lines and setback lines as appropriate. 
Setback Line. The minimum required distance from the street right-of-way line or any other property line that the principal building must observe. 
Setback Line, Front. An open yard area extending between the side lot lines across the front of a lot. The depth is the required minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. Also see Front yard. 
Setback line, Rear. The interior boundary of the rear setback area (or rear yard) being a line equidistant from the rear property line and extending from the side property lines at the minimum depth specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
Setback line, Side. The interior boundary of a side setback area (or side yard), being a line equidistant from the appropriate side property line(s) and extending from the front setback line to the rear setback line at a minimum depth as specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
103.  Shopping Center. Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single architecturally unified unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
104.  Sign. Any attached or free-standing outdoor advertising display of any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter, for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge, idea to or attracting the attention of the public and which is placed in general view of the public. 
Sign, Accessory. A professional or identification sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area, and which states the name or location of an incorporated or unincorporated community, public or private institution, or the name and meeting place of an official or civic body. An accessory sign shall not advertise a business activity or a product for sale or rent. 
Sign, General Advertisement. Any display, including billboards, flags, pennants, lights; signals, or structures, attached or free-standing, which advertises and directs attention to businesses, products, entertainment or services conducted, sold or offered at locations other than upon the premises where the sign is displayed, or any display or sign exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area. 
Sign, Principal. An attached, free-standing or structural sign pertaining to announcing or describing the principal use or uses of the premises upon which the sign is displayed or to the products sold, manufactured or assembled, services or entertainment available on the premises, or directing attention to a business, profession, or industry. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include official court or government notices or the flag emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit, or school. 
107.  Site-Built Home. A single family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by City of Greenville. 
108.  Special Exception Use. A use for a particular piece of property which may be allowed by the City Council when specifically listed in and provided for by this Ordinance. A special exception use is subject to such restrictive conditions as in the opinion of the City Council would be necessary to insure that the use is not detrimental to surrounding property. 
109.  Street. A public right-of-way, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way, that is dedicated or devoted to public pedestrian or vehicular use by deed, plat, and/or prescription, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
1.  Arterial Streets. These streets are intended to provide higher travel speeds between or within communities or to and from collectors and expressways. Access is controlled so that only community significant land use may have direct access to these streets. 
2.  Collector Streets. Collector streets connect residential streets to the highway system's major and higher (minor) arterials to provide access to nonresidential uses and arterials. Collectors form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are residential streets. Because uncongested traffic flow is necessary for their effective functioning residential uses are prohibited access to collectors. Collectors are classified as major collectors and minor collectors. 
[a.]  Major Collector. The primary function is to carry traffic for most major intraurban trips over one mile, particularly during peak hours. These streets provide only limited direct access to adjacent land. This direct access is usually focused on major facilities, shopping centers or other significant traffic generators. Major collectors are usually designed with four (4) travel lanes and may be either divided or undivided. On street parking cannot be permitted. 
[b.]  Minor Collector. The primary function is to carry traffic for short to medium (one-half to one mile) intra-urban trips and serves primarily local traffic. These strips receive traffic from residential streets and transmit it to major collectors and arterials. Minor collectors spaced to relieve excessive traffic volumes on local streets, are commonly designed with two (2) travel lanes. 
110.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes and fall-out shelters. 
111.  Subdivision. A subdivision shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into more than three (3) lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and resultant lots are equal to the standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
b.  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved. 
c.  Any division for agricultural purposes. 
112.  Temporary Uses. A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
113.  Trailer, Travel. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel" trailer. 
114.  Truck Terminal. A building and premises catering primarily to trucks which may include warehousing facilities, and may include the functions and services of a mechanical garage, but shall not include the storage of trucks or other vehicles for the purpose of using parts for sale or repair. 
115.  Undisturbed Natural Buffer (Greenbelt). A tract of land dedicated to the City in its natural undisturbed state where no vegetation can be removed or planted without a permit. No herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals, either natural or man-made can be used in this buffer. 
116.  Use, Special. Uses that are permitted in a particular zoning district, but only under certain specified conditions. See Special Exception Use. 
117.  Use, Permitted. Those uses specifically listed in this ordinance as "uses permitted inherently" not to include uses herein defined as "non-conforming uses." 
118.  Use, Principal. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
119.  Variance. A deviation from of the strict terms of the zoning regulations granted by the City where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any intentional action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship provided, however, that no variance shall be granted which shall authorize a land use or lot size not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
120.  Water System, Public. A potable water supply system owned by the City of Greenville. 
121.  Yard Sale. A one to two day sale of common household items from a residential lot or lots. Also garage sale carport sale, rummage sale. 
122.  Yard. A space on the same lot with the principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except for porches, steps and walkways and accessory building are expressly permitted. Yards shall be delineated by the "setback" and "setback line" definitions. 
Front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building (or front setback line) of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
Rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building (or rear setback line) on the lot and on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Side. That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building (or side setback line) on the lot extending from the front yard or front setback line (or front lot line where no front yard/setback line is required) to the rear yard or rear setback line (or rear lot line where no rear yard/setback line is required). 
123.  Zoning Map. The legally adopted "Zoning Districts Map of the City of Greenville, Georgia." 
124.  Zoning. The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2013) 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

4.1. - Use of Land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
4.2. - Use of Buildings. 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
4.2-1.  Location of Buildings. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as herein defined except as approved by the Planning Commission in the form of a variance. 
4.2-2.  Height of Buildings. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which it is located except for the following: 

 
Public and semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools, may be erected to a height not to exceed one hundred (100') feet; churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75') feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least one (1') foot for each one (1) foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
4.2-3.  Dimensional Regulations. No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e. the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
4.2-4.  Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. Such building shall be used for a period not to exceed one (1) year and shall be removed when the construction of the permanent building is completed. Construction of the permanent building is said to be completed at the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
4.3. - Interpretation and Application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
4.4. - Zoning Affects all Land and Buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
4.5. - Principal Building Per Lot. 
Unless provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, there shall be no more than one (1) principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
4.6. - Required Open Space May Not be used by Another Building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
4.7. - Reduction of Yards or Lot Areas. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
ARTICLE 5. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

5.1. - Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record which is legal on the date of the first published notice of this Ordinance, may be used subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
5.1-1.  Use of Substandard Lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance does not own sufficient area and width to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zone in which it is located; provided the owner has the approval in writing of the City of Greenville Planning Commission. 
5.1-2.  Residential Use of Substandard Lots. In addition to Section 5.1-1, in any residential district, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which has a width or area less than that required by this Ordinance may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling only. 
In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single family dwelling, the Planning Commission is empowered to hear the request for a side yard variance provided there is a ten (10) foot side yard. If a minimum ten (10) foot side yard is not possible then a minimum width for single family dwelling may be requested. 
5.2. - Area, Yard and Height Regulations. 
5.2-1.  Lot Area. Hereafter, no lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, size of yards or lot area per family requirement of this Ordinance is altered except when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
5.2-2.  Yards and Open Space. 
a.  Whenever a lot abuts a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
b.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky so that projections such as sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may not extend into a required yard. 
c.  Other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots shall violate the corner visibility provisions of this ordinance. 
5.2-3.  Front Yards. 
a.  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
b.  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
c.  Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the side adjacent to both streets and the remaining yards shall be considered side yard requirements. 
d.  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, which are not covered by a roof or canopy and do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback area if it is six (6) feet or less. 
e.  Within the same block and zoning district, when twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the existing buildings have less than the minimum required setback, the required front setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing front setbacks. 
5.2-4.  Side Yards. 
a.  For the purposes of the side yard regulations, a group of commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
b.  The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches and other public or semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, then the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
5.2-5,  Fences and Walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight (8') feet in height. 
5.3. - Corner Visibility. 
No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three (3') feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points twenty-five (25') feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
5.4. - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
5.4-1.  An accessory structure shall not be permitted in any required front yard, except as specified in Section 5.4-8. 
5.4-2.  No accessory building or structure shall be erected beyond a required yard line along any street. 
5.4-3.  Residential accessory uses such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
5.4-4.  All residential accessory buildings must be located at least ten (10') feet from the principal building. 
5.4-5.  Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
5.4-6.  Gasoline station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than fifteen (15') feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least fourteen (14') feet in height and the outermost edge shall be five (5') feet from any property line. 
5.4-7.  All nonresidential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessee or tenants of the premises, and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
5.4-8.  An open or unenclosed swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that the pool is not located closer than six (6') feet to a rear lot line or ten (10') feet to an interior side lot line. A three (3') foot wide walk space shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
5.5. - Residential Home Occupations. 
The conduct of business in residential units may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to ensure the following: 
a.  Compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential zoning districts; 
b.  Maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods and provide peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods. 
c.  Within the residential district, guarantee all residents freedom from excessive noise, traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effects of commercial uses being conducted in this district. 
Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
5.5-1.  A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
5.5-2.  No more than one (1) home occupation shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
5.5-3.  A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal use. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages which are attached or detached. 
5.5-4.  The residential home occupation is limited to employment of residents of the property and not more than one (1) additional person. 
5.5-5.  A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perceptions outside the principal structure. 
5.5-6.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street space and located in rear or side yard. 
5.5-7.  On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
5.5-8.  There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
5.5-9.  No on-street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) shall be permitted at any home. No business related vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or pickup truck is permitted to park overnight on the premises. The number of business related vehicles is one (1). 
5.5-10.  Permitted residential home occupations: 
a.  Architectural services. 
b.  Art Studio. 
c.  Consulting services. 
d.  Data Processing. 
e.  Dental technician and laboratory. 
f.  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Mary Kay, Tupperware etc.), provided there is no production on premises. 
g.  Drafting and graphic services. 
h.  Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (1 machine). 
i.  Electronic Assembly. 
j.  Engineering service. 
k.  Financial planning or investment services. 
l.  Flower arranging. 
m.  Home office. 
n.  House Cleaning service. 
o.  In-home child care, but not more than six (6) children at a time, including the caregiver's own pre-school children. 
p.  Insurance sales or broker. 
q.  Interior design. 
r.  Laundry and ironing service. 
s.  Locksmith. 
t.  Real estate sales, broker or appraisal service. 
u.  Telephone answering, switchboard call forwarding. 
v.  Tutoring, including all indoor and outdoor instructional services limited to two (2) students at a time. 
w.  Writing, resume services, computer programming. 
5.5-11.  Prohibited residential home occupations: 
a.  Ambulance service. 
b.  Restaurants, food preparation. 
c.  Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing services. 
d.  Veterinary services (including care, grooming and boarding). 
5.6. - Special Density Lots for the Use of Family Homesteads. 
In order to perpetuate the family homestead in rural areas, each parcel in single ownership may be subdivided for use solely as a homestead by an individual who is the grandparent, parent, stepparent, adopted parent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the person who conveyed the parcel to said individual, at a density not to exceed one (1) unit per acre. This provision supersedes other land use district density requirements, except that it may not be used within a platted subdivision. In order to qualify for the use of family homestead, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  The property being transferred must be used as the primary residence of the grantee. 
2.  The deed for transferred property must state the relationship of the grantee to the grantor. 
3.  Transferred property may be deeded in the heirs (grantee) name or jointly deeded in the grantor/grantee names. The transferred property may not be deeded solely in the grantor name. 
4.  This special density provision may be utilized on only one (1) occasion per eligible individual grantee. The grantor may exercise this special density provision for other eligible individual grantees, so long as the maximum allowable density for the property transferred from the original parcel can be met. 
5.  An individual wishing to obtain a manufactured home or conventional building permit under these special density provisions shall make application to the City Clerk. Upon verification of the eligibility of the applicant, a permit may be issued. 
6.  Should the transferred property be subsequently sold or otherwise transferred to another party, including non-family party, these special density provisions shall remain. 
5.7. - Medical Hardship Secondary Detached Dwelling. 
A manufactured home which meets Type III appearance standards (Table 7.2) may be parked, set up according to regulations set forth in Article 12 and occupied as a residence in a residential area where a medical hardship exists after application of a special use and approval of same from the Greenville City Council. 
5.7-1.  [Medical Hardship.] Medical Hardship is defined as a health or mental condition necessitating attention and supervision from the occupants of either the primary dwelling or the manufactured home. 
5.7-2.  Occupants. Occupants of the primary dwelling shall provide proof to the Planning Commission and City Council that a secondary detached dwelling unit is necessary for the physical care and well being of the infirm person (doctor or medical facility affidavit, nursing home recommendation, etc.). The occupants of the primary dwelling shall also provide approval by the Meriwether County Health Department of proper sewerage and water facilities. 
5.7-3.  Permit Expiration. Once the state of "medical hardship" is removed, the land use permit for manufactured homes shall expire and the manufactured home shall be removed in a timely manner, but in no case longer than three months. 
5.7-4.  Manufactured Home Secondary Detached Dwelling Permit. A manufactured home permit that is issued under this section shall expire twelve (12) months from the date it is granted. A renewal of the permit must meet all requirements of a new application, however, no advertisement or posting of a sign shall be required. However, this manufactured home shall not be used for any other purpose than to provide assistance in the case of medical hardship. This manufactured home shall not be used for storage, commercial, home occupation or rented for economic gain by the home owner. 
5.8. - Cemeteries. 
All proposed cemeteries whether public, private or in conjunction with a religious institution shall not be located in a floodplain area as delineated by FIRM maps for the City of Greenville. All cemeteries shall be a minimum of 5 acres and shall be in compliance with all state regulations regarding cemeteries. 
5.9. - Property Maintenance. 
To ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Greenville, the following regulations shall be established for the maintenance of property in the City: 
5.9-1.  Non-functioning appliances shall be stored in an enclosed accessory or principal building. Any unused appliances being stored such as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, etc., shall have doors removed prior to storage. 
5.9-2.  Any major auto repairs such as building motors, transmissions or heavy body work shall be done in an enclosed accessory building or on a section of property nor visible from the public street. 
5.9-3.  Non-licensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed accessory building. No more than three non-licensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on property unless application for a junkyard has been issued by the Greenville City Council. 
5.9-4.  Yard sales shall last for a specified duration only. There shall not be any continuous yard sales in Greenville. Storing of yard sale items shall be in an enclosed accessory or principal building and shall not be on display in any yard except during the hours of the yard sales. Yard sales may last eight hours a day no more than four days a month at the same residence. Yard sales shall be on a lot with an occupied principal building except for sales in commercially zoned districts. 
5.9-5.  No abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall be used as a storage or accessory building. Abandoned mobile/manufactured homes shall be removed from property at owner's expense and upon notification by the Codes Enforcement officer that the said mobile/manufactured home is abandoned and is causing a health or safety hazard to surrounding property owners. 
5.10. - Junkyards, Junk Business or Salvage Operation. 
To ensure the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Greenville, the following shall state the regulations necessary for junkyards, junk businesses and salvage operations: 
5.10-1.  The minimum lot area for a junkyard, junk business or salvage operation shall be ten acres. 
5.10-2.  All junkyards, junk businesses or salvage operations shall be buffered in accordance with Article, Buffer 1-5. 
ARTICLE 6. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

6.1. - Establishment of Districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, incorporated city limits of the City of Greenville is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
6.1-1.  Rural Residential (RR). The purpose of this district is to provide a low density residential district which includes limited agricultural uses. This district is designed to maintain rural character. 
6.1-2.  Single Family Residential (R-20). The purpose of this district is to provide a medium density residential district to accommodate single family dwellings. 
6.1-4.  Multi-Family Residential (R-40). This district is established to provide high density multi and single family residential areas. 
6.1-5.  General Commercial (GC). This district is established to provide a location for commercial growth in neighborhoods and along highway corridors. 
6.1-7.  Industrial District (I). This district is established to provide appropriate locations for industrial operations. 
6.2. - Zoning District Map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Official Zoning District Map." The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of the text of this Ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the City of Greenville, City Clerk. 
6.3. - District Boundaries. 
6.3-1.  The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Official Zoning Map. 
6.3-2.  When the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, the boundary line may be allowed to extend a distance of not more than fifty (50') feet to the least restrictive zoned district. 
ARTICLE 7. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

7.1. - District, Lot and Height Standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in Table 7.1: Zoning District Area, Yard and Height Requirements. 
TABLE 7.1. DISTRICT AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

 
7.2. - Appearance Standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured houses. Approval shall be granted upon finding that such development shall meet or exceed the Appearance standards as shown on Table 7.2: Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
TABLE 7.2. APPEARANCE STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS 

 
Notes: 
1.  The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspectors. 
2.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal lap, vinyl lap, or other materials approved by the building inspector. 
3.  Permanent foundations shall meet the requirements of standard building code requirements for manufactured homes. For manufactured homes, a masonry curtain wall unpierced except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level. 
4.  For manufactured homes, a landing area is required and its width and length must be greater than or equal to the width of the entrance doorway. 
5.  Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices. 
6.  Manufactured homes which cannot remove towing devices shall be screened by plantings and the structure shall be skirted. 
7.3. - Permitted Uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in Table 7.3. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the City of Greenville Planning Commission. Special use permits are subject to standards for special uses stated in Article 15. For uses not included on this list where the Codes Enforcement Officer is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the Planning Commission for an amendment to this table under provisions of this Ordinance for text amendments to the zoning ordinance and in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
TABLE 7.3. PERMITTED USES 

 
(Ord. of 8-6-2013) 
ARTICLE 8. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
A buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in dissimilar zone districts as shown in following Table 8.1. 
TABLE 8.1. BUFFER REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR ZONE DISTRICTS 

 

8.1. - Determination of Buffer Requirements between Residential, Commercial and Industrial Zones. 
When two adjoining properties are in dissimilar residential, commercial or industrial zone districts as indicated in Table 8.1, the property within the zone district allowing the most intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in dissimilar zone districts as indicated in Table 8.1, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
8.1-1.  Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.2. If plantings are chosen as the method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of twelve (12) feet. 
8.1-2.  Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a fifty (50) foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a twenty (20) foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.2. 
8.1-3.  Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a one hundred (100) foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a twenty (20) foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of Section 8.2. 
8.1-4.  Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of either an unvegetated five hundred (500) foot setback or two hundred (200) foot vegetated setback from the adjoining property line. A two hundred (200) foot minimum setback shall consist of seventy-five (75) foot of vegetated buffer area, measured along the entire portion of the property line abutting said use, and such buffer shall extend an additional one hundred (100) feet in each direction along the common property line. The seventy-five (75) foot vegetated buffer shall meet the screening requirements contained in Section 8.2. 
8.2. - Screening Standards. 
Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, a berm or densely planted vegetation. 
Plantings. Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will provide the best screening effectiveness. 
If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening device, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the City Clerk which, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight (8) feet and a canopy spread of ten (10) feet within four (4) years. They shall be planted a minimum twenty (20) feet on center. 
If trees are used in combination with shrubs, they may be of any species from the list provided by the City Clerk. Small trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center, and large trees forty (40) feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the City Clerk planted four (4) feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six (6) feet within three (3) years after planting. 

Walls. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of eight (8) feet. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intensive land use. 
Fences. Fences shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and constructed of standard wood fencing materials and methods or chain link with woven inserts that will provide ninety percent (90%) visual blockage. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
8.3. - Buffer Design. 
All buffers required by this article shall conform to the following specifications: 
8.3-1.  Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
8.3-2.  Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
8.3-3.  Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this Article if the Building Inspector determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this Article. 
8.4. - Location of Buffers. 
Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lot lined adjoining dissimilar zones including adjacent property lines, which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
8.5. - Variances. 
The requirements of this Article may be waived by the City of Greenville Planning Commission under any of the following conditions: 
8.5-1.  If it is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purpose of this Article. 
8.5-2.  If it is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
8.5-3.  The adjoining property owners mutually agree in writing that the required buffer is not necessary for a satisfactory use and enjoyment of their property rights. 
8.5-4.  It is clearly demonstrated that an existing (or) proposed public right-of-way separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this Article. 
8.6. - Use of Buffers. 
A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike, equestrian trails, or as a storm water retention area provided that: 
8.6-1.  No planted materials shall be eliminated; and 
8.6-2.  The total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained. 
8.7. - Maintenance. 
The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. Any required plant that has died shall be replaced. Maintenance of planted areas shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials and necessary pruning. Fences and walls shall be kept in a condition that meets the requirements of this Article. 
8.8. - Failure to Comply with these Provisions. 
See Article 15.19 of this Ordinance for penalty provisions. 
8.9. - Surety for Buffer Installation. 
When the date for issuing a Certificate of Occupancy does not coincide with the planting conditions that are necessary to install a required buffer, the City Clerk shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the City Clerk and shall certify the following: 
8.9-1.  That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing all buffers as estimated and approved by the Building Inspector; 
8.9-2.  That in case of failure of the developer to complete the specified improvements, the creditor shall pay the government immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of the secured credit; and 
8.9-3.  That the letter of credit or other surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released by the Building Inspector after final inspection and certification of approval of the buffer. 
ARTICLE 9. - SIGNS 

9.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to permit signs that will not, by the their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals; confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety; or otherwise endanger public health, safety, or welfare; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement objectives set forth in this Ordinance. 
9.2. - Location. 
The location of signs shall conform with State law. (See O.C.G.A. Sections 32-1-21; 32-50-51; 21-1-1, et al.) In general, except for government signs as allowed by State law, all signs shall be located on private property. 
9.3. - General Provisions. 
9.3-1.  Corner Visibility Clearance. In any district no sign or sign structure (above a height of three (3') feet) shall be maintained within fifteen (15') feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets, or of a street with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign structure not more than ten (10") inches in diameter, if located on a corner lot where services are provided to the motoring public, may be located within the required corner visibility area if all other requirements of this article are met and the lower elevation of the sign surface is at least ten (10') feet above ground level. 
9.3-2.  Lighting Restrictions. 
a.  Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected. 
b.  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
c.  No internally illuminated ground or pole signs shall be erected within fifty (50') feet of any dwelling within a residential district. 
d.  No sign shall be erected if it contains, or is illuminated by any flashing intermittent or moving light or lights except an electronic message board sign. 
e.  No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign so as to confuse or mislead the traffic or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
9.3-3.  Other Restrictions. 
a.  No sign shall be erected, attached, or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
b.  No sign shall be erected, attached, painted or drawn on any tree, rock or other natural feature, retaining wall or utility post along the public right-of-way. 
9.4. - Sign Types and Standards. 
The following sign standards apply to all districts except as specified elsewhere in this Article. If any other standards in this ordinance conflict with the standard in this article the stricter regulation shall apply. 
9.4-1.  Pole Signs. Pole signs shall not extend over a public right-of-way. All signs abutting the right-of-way line shall have the display area ten (10') feet or more above ground level measured from the grade at the right-of-way line. Signs with any portion of the display area less than ten (10') feet above ground level must be erected ten (10') feet from the right-of-way line. If the location of the sign structure is below the grade of the road, the height of the sign shall be measured from the nearest adjacent roadway. Within a commercial or industrial district, the maximum height shall be twenty (20') feet. 
9.4-2.  Ground Signs. Ground signs less than three (3') feet high shall be setback at least three (3') feet from the right-of-way line. Otherwise, such signs shall be setback ten (10') feet from the right-of-way line. The maximum area of a ground sign shall be forty (40') square feet. 
9.4-3.  Wall Signs and Flush-Mounted Canopy Signs. Wall signs and flush mounted canopy signs (including signs attached flat against the wall or canopy and painted signs) shall be securely fastened by metal supports to the building surface along the sign's greatest dimension. They may project from the building up to twelve (12") inches; however, if they project more than four (4") inches from the building surface, they shall maintain a clear height of eight (8') feet above ground level. Wall signs may not extend more than four (4') feet above the parapet wall. 
a.  Individual Business. The total number of wall signs or canopy signs on all facades of a building is counted as one (1) sign, and the total sign display area of each wall shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the wall area up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet. 
b.  Multi-Business/Shopping Center. The maximum display area of wall signs or canopy signs for each business shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the front facade of each individual business. 
9.4-4.  Hanging Canopy Signs. All hanging canopy signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size and the lowest extremity of the sign shall not be less than eight (8') feet above the ground. 
9.4-5.  Roof Signs. 
a.  Roof signs shall not project beyond the face of the exterior wall of the building on which they are located. 
b.  The highest point of a roof sign shall not exceed the ridge line of the roof. 
c.  Roof signs shall not be erected on building or structures with a flat roof. 
d.  The maximum size of a roof sign shall not exceed sixty-four square feet. 
9.4-6.  Window Signs. Each ground level business having glass directly orientated to a street may use all of that glass area as one (1) allowable sign, but no single window shall be covered more than twenty-five (25%) percent. Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage. 
9.4-7.  Banners. The maximum size of a banner shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
9.5. - Use of Signs Permitted by Districts. 
9.5-1.  Business Signs. Business signs are permanently mounted signs, that are permitted in all districts allowing business activity. Except as specified below, all business signs shall meet the standards according to Section 9.4. The maximum number of business signs for an establishment or development is listed in Table 9.1. 
TABLE 9.1. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF BUSINESS SIGNS 

 
Sign Standards refer to Section 9.4: Sign Types and Standards. 
X = Permitted by Right 
9.5-2.  Non-Business Signs. Non-business signs are permanently mounted signs that are permitted in all districts and shall meet the requirements as shown on Table 9.2: Maximum Number of Non-Business Signs: 
a.  Announcing Signs. Announcing signs are signs used to announce activities to be held at any noncommercial place of public assembly. These signs may be ground or wall signs. 
b.  Commemorative Signs. Commemorative signs are tablets or plaques which identify a person, event, structure or a site of memorable public interest. These may be ground or wall signs. 
c.  Directional Signs. Directional signs are permanent off-premise, non illuminated ground signs erected only by churches, government agencies and non-profit organizations which provide direction to such church, organization, agency or related facility. 
[d.]  Identification Signs. Identification signs bear only the names or addresses of occupants of the premises and bearing no commercial message other than that of the use identified. These signs may be wall or ground signs. 
[e.]  Instructional Signs. Signs exclusive of any commercial messages except the business name and/or logo, which conveys instructions to the public such as entrance, exit, no trespassing, no dumping, no hunting, height clearance, etc. These signs may be wall or ground signs. 
TABLE 9.2. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF NON-BUSINESS SIGNS 

 
* Permitted Sign Types: Ground, wall or canopy signs only. 
9.5-3.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all districts. 
a.  Temporary Construction Signs. Signs erected on the premises where construction is taking place which indicate the names of individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the construction of the structures or project. 
1.  Temporary construction signs may be pole, ground or wall signs. 
2.  Only one (1) sign shall be allowed per street frontage. 
3.  The maximum sign display area of each sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. 
4.  The period of existence of such signs shall be one (1) month prior to commencement of construction through one (1) month following completion. 
b.  Temporary Political Signs. Signs which announce or support political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election. The following requirements shall apply: 
1.  A temporary sign permit is required according to Section 9.8-2 prior to the erection of such signs. 
2.  All signs shall be ground or pole signs and shall be setback ten (10') feet from the street right-of-way. 
3.  The maximum height of each sign shall not exceed eight (8') feet measuring from the grade level of the sign. The sign area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
4.  Signs shall not be erected prior to the date that the candidate qualifies for the election, or the filing of the issue for certification of the ballot. 
5.  Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election including any runoff which the sign is intended to influence. 
6.  Signs shall not be erected without the permission of the property owner. 
7.  At any time, the City of Greenville is empowered to remove or cause removal of all signs not conforming with the provisions of this Article without notice to the candidate whose signs create the non-conformity. This requirement, however, does not demand forfeiture of the bond that is posted for a permit (see Section 9.8-2(b)). 
c.  Temporary Real Estate Signs. Signs erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the sale, rental of lease of the property advertised; however, the use of a "SOLD" attachment to a sign pending the completion of a sales transaction shall not be construed as a sale. 
1.  All temporary real estate signs may be pole, ground, window or wall signs. 
2.  Under no circumstances shall the display area of a temporary real estate sign exceed the following size: 
•  Residential Unit ..... 16 sq. ft. 
•  Residential Project ..... 32 sq. ft. 
•  Non-Residential ..... 64 sq. ft. 
d.  Temporary Real Estate Directional Signs. Off-premise[s] signs which provide directions to properties for sale, lease or rent. 
1.  All temporary real estate directional signs shall be ground signs only. 
2.  The display area of each sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet. 
e.  Temporary Garage Sale Signs. 
1.  Temporary garage sale signs shall be ground signs only and their maximum size shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
2.  Signs may be erected two (2) days prior to sale and shall be removed no later than midnight on the last day of sale. 
f.  Special Event Signs. Special event signs announce special civic activities, events or shows to be held in the near future. Special event signs shall be banner signs or any permitted temporary signs provided that a temporary sign permit is obtained according to Section 9.8-2(b) prior to the erection of such signs. 
9.6. - Prohibited Signs. 
Any sign that will pose public safety hazards are prohibited. Existing prohibited signs shall be removed one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this Ordinance. The following types of signs and displays, as they are defined herein, are unlawful to erect or maintain in all zoning districts: 
9.6-1.  Abandoned Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer being conducted or available on the premises on which the signs are located. The signs must be removed upon notification to and order of the Codes Enforcement officer. 
9.6-2.  Animated Signs. Animated, series, lines or rows or electric, neon signs that involve motion. 
9.6-3.  Bench Signs. Benches, including courtesy benches, trash cans and similar devices on which advertising is displayed. 
9.6-4.  Projecting Signs. Signs that project more than twelve (12") inches from the building surface. 
9.6-5.  Portable Signs. All portable signs, including hot air balloons and gas/air inflatable signs. 
9.6-6.  Temporary Signs. Except as otherwise permitted by or exempted from these regulations. 
9.6-7.  Moving Signs. 
9.6-8.  Pendants and Streamers. 
9.6-9.  Banners. Except as permitted in special events. 
9.7. - Billboards. 
9.7-1.  State Codes. All billboards shall conform with Section 32-6-70 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) (GA. Law 196, p.426, Section 1; GA. Law 1971, ex. sess., p. 5 Section 1; GA. Law 1973, p. 947, Section 1; GA. Law 1979, p. 1086, Section 1; GA. Law 1980, p. 1017, Section 1) through Section 36-6-97 of the O.C.G.A. (GA. Law 1971 ex. sess., p. 5, Section 20; GA. Law 1973, p. 947 Section 1) on the erection of outdoor advertising, etc., in areas adjacent to right-of-way of roads in the State highway system, and shall meet all Federal and State requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the full reference provisions. 
Any billboard that advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of said activity, business, product or service. 
9.7-2.  Location. 
a.  Billboards shall be permitted only in the General Commercial (GC) and Industrial (I) districts. 
b.  No billboard shall be erected within three hundred (300') feet of the nearest property line of any public park, public playground, public school, recreational area, historic site, church or similar institution. No billboard shall be placed within one hundred (100') of a residential district. 
9.7-3.  Size and Number. No single billboard (display area and attached trim) shall exceed three-hundred (300) square feet (12' × 25') in size. No more than one (1) sign per sign structure will be allowed to face the same direction. 
9.7-4.  Linear Spacing. No billboard shall be erected within one thousand (1,000') feet of another billboard on the same side of the street as measured along a line parallel to such street. 
9.7-5.  Setback and Height. All billboards shall be setback ten (10') feet from the right-of-way line of any street or highway and shall be ten (10') feet or more above the adjacent pavement level of the street or highway to which it is oriented. The total height of the billboard(s) shall not be greater than twenty-five (25') feet when measured from the grade level of the adjacent street or highway or at the grade of the sign site if such grade is above the grade of the street. 
9.7-6.  Extrusion Prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
9.7-7.  Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights are prohibited. 
9.8. - Administration. 
9.8-1.  Construction and Maintenance. 
a.  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in constant repair and unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be periodically given a protective coating. The area immediately in front of all free-standing signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
b.  The provisions and regulations of this Ordinance shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repairing, cleaning or changing of the message without a change in structure. 
9.8-2.  Sign Permit. 
a.  General Requirements. 
1.  A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved to an extent of sixty (60%) percent of its total replacement value. Listed below are signs that require a permit: 
•  Business Signs. 
•  Billboards. 
•  Special Event Signs (Temporary Permit). 
•  Temporary Political Signs (Temporary Permit). 
2.  A sign permit shall be issued by the City Clerk of Greenville when the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conforms to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the Building Code as certified by the City Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by plans which identify the locations of signs and other applicable information that the City Clerk may be required in the exercise of sound discretion in acting upon the application. 
3.  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of issuance. 
b.  Temporary Permit. 
1.  Special Event Signs. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits for special event signs to be placed along the streets of the City of Greenville whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Said temporary permit shall require a two hundred dollar ($200) cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted no earlier than ten (10) days prior to the event. 
2.  Temporary Political Signs. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for political signs to be placed along the streets of the City of Greenville whereby the public will be informed about a candidate or directed to a political event. Said temporary permit shall require a two hundred dollar ($200) cash bond and no political signs shall be erected prior to the candidates qualifying day as established by applicable Federal, State or Local law.* 
*All special event and political signs authorized by temporary permit must be removed by the permittee within seven (7) days after such event or election has been held or the $200 cash bond is forfeited. 
9.8-3.  Permit Fee. 
a.  No permit shall be issued until an application accompanied with a sign plan is approved by the City Clerk and fees paid as posted in City Hall in the City of Greenville. 
b.  A permit fee shall be paid to the City of Greenville for each permit required by this Ordinance. The fee shall be increased in direct relation to the increase in the dollar value of the sign and type of sign, according to the rate schedule in City Hall in the City of Greenville. 
9.9. - Non-Conforming Signs. 
Refer to Article 10 of this Ordinance. 
9.10. - Enforcement. 
9.10-1.  Violation. If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the City Clerk shall have the power to give the owner thereof written notice of such violation. The notice shall include a brief statement of the particulars in which such violation is to be remedied. If a sign has not been registered and the owner is not known, affixing a copy of the notice to the sign, graphic structure or building for a period of ten (10) days shall be sufficient. 
9.10-2.  Penalties. If such violation is not remedied within thirty (30) days after such notice, the owner shall remove the sign immediately or be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100) a day fine for each day, with each act or omission considered a separate violation. 
9.10-3.  Removal. If the sign is not removed by the owner, the City Council shall have the right to remove such sign at the expense of the owner thereof and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the sign. In addition to the above provisions, the City Council may cause the sign or structure to be removed which: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe; 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reasons of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; 
c.  Is not kept in good repair; or 
d.  Is capable of causing electrical shock, to be removed following notice of twenty-four (24) hours to the owner at the expense of the owner and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the same. 
ARTICLE 10. - NON-CONFORMING REGULATIONS 

10.1. - Non-Conforming Lots. 
Any lots for which a plat or legal description has been recorded with the Meriwether County Clerk of Court at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, may be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
a.  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
b.  A lot to be used for duplexes, multi-family dwellings, residential group development projects, or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
10.2. - Non-Conforming Uses of Land. 
Non-conforming uses of land consists of the open use of property (including such uses but not limited to storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, manufactured housing parks and similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
a.  When a non-conforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any other non-conforming use. 
b.  Non-conforming uses of land shall not be changed to any, but, conforming uses. 
c.  A non-conforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became non-conforming. 
d.  When any non-conforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
10.3. - Non-Conforming Uses of Structures. 
Non-conforming uses of structures consists of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, non-conforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
a.  An existing non-conforming use of a structure shall only be changed to a conforming use. 
b.  An existing non-conforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another non-conforming use. 
c.  A non-conforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became non-conforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such non-conforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a non-conforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
d.  When any non-conforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one (1) year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
10.4. - Non-Conforming Signs. 
a.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign except when the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or replacement of removable letters and numbers on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. 
b.  Repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs shall be permitted to maintain a safe condition and neat appearance so long as the sign remains substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance. However, no changes in the size or shape of a non-conforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
10.5. - Reconstruction of Non-Conforming Structures. 
When a non-conforming structure or a structure containing a non-conforming use or non-conforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a non-conforming use only if the damage totals less than fifty (50%) percent of the value of the structure. If the non-conforming structure is damaged more than fifty (50%) the structure may be rebuilt only if it conforms to the zoning ordinance as adopted. Non-conforming manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park may be replaced according to Type IV appearance standards. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
10.6. - Restoration to a Safe Condition. 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any structure or use to a safe or sanitary condition, nor shall be ordinance prevent regular maintenance of any non-conforming use or structure. 
10.7. - Change, Enlargement or Reestablishment of a Non-Conforming Use. 
The City Council of the City of Greenville may grant the change, reestablishment or enlargement of a non-conforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a non-conforming structure upon the following findings: 
1.  The change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use. 
2.  The structure cannot be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the district. 
3.  The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming uses would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
4.  The proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, replacement or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 
5.  The requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for rezoning would prevent the current zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement. 
10.8. - Applications. 
Applications submitted to the City Council requesting the change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a non-conforming use or structure shall include the following information: 
1.  The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the City Council that the use or structure: 
a.  Shall not cause substantial detriment to the public good; 
b.  Could not be economically converted to a conforming use; 
c.  That the present use is legally non-conforming; 
d.  That change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use; 
e.  That the structure has such value, that removal, to permit conforming structures, would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
2.  The applicant shall submit a plat or an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot, size and location of all structures and their distance from all property lines, the names of all streets which the property abuts and all parking spaces. 
3.  If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. This description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs, and other information as needed for the City Council to reach an informed decision. 
10.9. - City Council Action. 
If the requested change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement is approved, the City Council may place conditions on the approval to ensure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. 
10.10. - Changes in Zoning. 
Any non-conformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
ARTICLE 11. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

11.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations to foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on private and public streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
11.2. - Off-Street Parking. 
a.  Off-Street Automobile Parking and Storage. Off-street parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this section are established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth in Table 11.1. Each automobile parking space shall be at least nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet long and be made of gravel, asphalt or concrete. No dirt parking spaces shall be allowed for commercial or industrial uses. 
b.  If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the Planning Commission may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within five hundred (500') feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
c.  All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single family residential uses shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the premises. 
d.  Gross leasable area (GLA) is the total building floor area in square feet that a developer may lease. Gross floor area is the sum of the areas of floors of a building, including all areas for human occupancy, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls but excluding unenclosed porches, interior parking spaces or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six (6') feet, six (6') inches. 
e.  Improvement and Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be graded in insure proper drainage, surfaces with all-weather gravel, asphalt or concrete materials and maintained in a clean, orderly and dust free condition. 
f.  Bumper Guards. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with all-weather gravel materials, a bumper guard or wheel stop shall be installed to mark each space. 
g.  Marking. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with concrete or asphalt, each parking space shall be painted with stripes, not less than three (3") inches wide, running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by other acceptable methods which clearly delineate the parking space within the parking lot. 
h.  Handicapped Parking. Parking for the handicapped within a nonresidential district shall be provided at a size, number and location according to the requirements of the ADA accessibility guidelines (ASAAG), published by the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barrier Compliance Board (ATBCB), as amended. 
11.3. - Residential Parking. 
All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  If garages or carports are converted to living area, then the off-street parking requirements must be met elsewhere on the lot. 
b.  No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than fourteen (14) days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be in an enclosed garage in residential districts. 
c.  No commercial vehicle as licensed by the State with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 lbs shall be allowed to park in R-1, R-14, or Multi family residential districts unless it can be completely enclosed. 
d.  Commercial vehicles, licensed by the State, busses and recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any residential district. 
e.  Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any residential district. 
f.  Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard of any residential district and must be parked in an area of the yard least visible from any public street. 
TABLE 11.1. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY USES 

 
11.4. - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, a street. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back into a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. 
a.  Retail Business and Services. A space ten (10') by twenty-five (25') feet for each 20,000 square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
b.  Wholesale and Industry. One space ten (10') feet by fifty (50') feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor space plus one additional space for each 60,000 additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
c.  Bus and Truck Terminal. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of busses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
ARTICLE 12. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

12.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the [this] Article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Greenville. The City of Greenville recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy, in the incorporated City of Greenville, Georgia. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the City of Greenville Planning Commission, the Meriwether County Health Department, and the Building Inspections Department to review the development of manufactured home sites and manufactured home parks within the incorporated areas of the City of Greenville for the purposes stated in this ordinance. 
12.2. - Manufactured Homes. 
12.2-1.  Nonconforming Use. Nonconforming mobile/manufactured home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, the manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park shall be in compliance with these regulations, as amended. 
12.2-2.  Location Disclosure and Decal Requirement. Every person holding title to or possession of a manufactured home which is placed or located within the limits of City of Greenville, shall report the location of, and obtain a location decal for, said manufactured home from the Tax Commissioner, of Meriwether County annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designed in such manner and affixed to the manufactured home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
12.2-3.  Issuance of Permit. Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home, shall obtain a permit from the Building Inspector of Greenville indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home. 
12.2-4.  Permit Application Procedures. A manufactured home permit to move a manufactured home into or within the City shall not be issued by the City of Greenville Building Inspector until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
a.  A valid location decal must be issued from the Tax Commissioner's Office and attached to the manufactured home. 
b.  All manufactured homes located in the City of Greenville shall be no more than [five (5)] years old. 
c.  All manufactured homes must meet or exceed appearance standards for the zoning district in which it is located, or in an approved manufactured home park subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
d.  For individual lots not approved under the manufactured home park regulations, a sanitary permit must be obtained from the Meriwether County Health Department for on site sewage disposal (if applicable), in the event that sewer will be provided, a letter shall be provided by the local government providing the service verifying they will allow public sewer hookup. 
e.  For purposes of this Section, the Tax Commissioner shall issue the aforementioned location decal, the Building Inspector shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the Health Department shall mention the aforementioned sanitary permit. Upon issuance of the required permits, a manufactured home may be moved into the City and installed for occupancy. 
f.  All manufactured homes located on individual lots will adhere to the appearance standards set forth in Article 7. The type of appearance standard required will depend on the zoning district where the manufactured home is located. 
12.2-5.  Exception to the Issuance of a Building Permit. A building permit shall be required to locate a manufactured home in the City of Greenville except under the following condition: 
a.  Manufactured homes may be brought in the City and located on a sales lot of a State approved dealer as listed in the office of the State Safety Fire Commissioner for sale without a building or sanitary permit. However, under no exceptions shall any manufactured home, which is located on a sales lot, be occupied unless all permit requirements in these regulations are met. Installation must comply with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, Chapter 120-3-7, Appendix A, made and promulgated by the Georgia Fire Safety Commissioner pursuant to authority set forth in O.C.G.A. 
12.2-6.  Provision for Temporary Power After the Issuance of a Building Permit. The Building Inspector, after inspection, is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 120 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary construction and installation of the manufactured home. This provision specifically does not authorize permanent power hookup or occupancy of the manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of said home. 
12.2-7.  Minimum Construction Standards. Each newly installed manufactured home in City of Greenville shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said manufactured home. It is the intent of this Section of this Ordinance to prohibit moving manufactured homes into City of Greenville that do not conform to the applicable Housing and Urban Development Construction Standards, as expressed in 42 USC 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this City unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by HUD, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanent label or tag certifying the compliance. Manufactured homes which do not display certification compliance shall not be eligible for a City of Greenville building and/or occupancy permit. Any manufactured home in the City of Greenville which legally exists at the time of adoption of this ordinance that does display certification compliance shall not be required to have certification. However, any manufactured home which does not display certification shall be considered a nonconforming structure and shall not be relocated to any other site within the city. 
12.2-8.  Installation Requirements. All newly installed manufactured homes shall be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and Chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes plus Appendix A of that document, made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. All manufactured homes shall be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tie-downs devices, an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system and an approved landing at each exit as required by the aforementioned rules, regulations and in compliance with appearance standards for the appropriate zoning district. Each manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than eighty (80) inches in elevation from the finished grades, in accordance with Chapter 120-3-7 Appendix A. All manufactured homes shall be installed to meet the manufacturer's regulations. At the time of inspection, the space beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed, with the exception of ventilation and access openings, and according to the appearance standards in Article 7 it must be in compliance with (type I, II or III). The residential zone of each manufactured home will dictate which type it must meet (see permitted use Table 7.1). At the time of request for building permit number of ventilation openings shall be set by the building inspector. The standards are more specifically explained in the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes. The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
12.2-9.  Inspection for Manufactured Homes. The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks: 
a.  Foundation. The Building Inspector shall require the foundation to be inspected to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as may be subsequently revised. These Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes are incorporated as a part of this Ordinance by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the Building Inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
b.  Plumbing. The Building Inspector shall require the external plumbing system to be inspected, including water and sewage hookups, to ensure compliance with Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the appropriate, applicable, accepted plumbing codes used by the Building Inspector for site built homes. Until the plumbing system is inspected and approved by the Building Inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
c.  On-site Sewerage. Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed with public or community water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than required in the zoning district in which the home is located. All on site sewerage systems shall be subject to the City of Greenville Health Department approval. Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed in conjunction with private water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than 40,000 sq. ft. 
d.  Stairs and Landings. The building inspector shall require stairs and landings to comply with Section 1208—Stairway Construction of the Georgia State Building Code, as amended, and also to Section P, Appendix A of the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as amended. 
e.  Electrical. The building inspector shall require inspection of the electrical system to ensure compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes and the current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
f.  Gas. The building inspector shall require inspection of the gas system to ensure compliance with the current Standard Gas Code, as amended. 
g.  Until these inspections have been made and the manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by written documentation provided to the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. 
12.2-10.  Occupancy of Recreational Vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied within any manufactured home park development nor connected to permanent water or electrical power and no manufactured home location permits shall be issued for recreational vehicles. 
12.3. - Manufactured Home Parks. 
12.3-1.  Procedures for Development. All manufactured home parks developed after adoption of this ordinance shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
a.  Site Plan Approval Required. All manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures and requirements established herein. Site plans required herein for the placement of three (3) or more residential units shall contain the seal of a Georgia Registered Engineer or Surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
b.  Park Plan Submittal Requirements. All park plans shall be submitted to the City Clerk accompanied by the required fee payment as established by the City of Greenville. The City Clerk will convey the plans to the Planning Commission for approval. 
c.  The name of the proposed park, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Location map and legal description of the manufactured home park, north arrow (designated, magnetic or true). 
e.  Complete plans to scale of one inch equals not more than one hundred (100) feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
•  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five (5) feet or an interval appropriate for decision making on the tract; and including the location and type of soils on the tract. Statement of accuracy signed by surveyor or engineer as applicable. 
•  The number, location and dimensions of all manufactured home lots. 
•  The location and width of streets; the location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
•  The location of service buildings (laundry service, office, community building etc.) and other proposed structures. 
•  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
•  Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewerage disposal facilities. 
•  Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed with the park. 
•  The location of street lights, if applicable. 
•  The location of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park identification signs. 
•  A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
•  Certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability. 
f.  Development Compliance. All required improvements, according to the site plan approved by the Planning Commission, shall be installed in each phase before the issuance of building permits. 
12.3-2.  Regulations. 
a.  Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall adhere to the following: 
1.  All streets shall be constructed so as to reduce dust, and in accordance with stipulations as shall be required by the County Engineer or Georgia Department of Transportation specifications to ensure properly constructed streets. 
2.  All areas designated as yards shall be planted with grass, vegetative shrubs or flowers. 
3.  Any walkways to front or back entrances shall be covered with stone or other solid material capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
b.  Location and Frontage. A manufactured home park development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200' (two hundred) feet on a public street. 
c.  Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every park site shall be graded and equipped to drain all water in a safe, efficient manner. 
d.  Streets. All mobile manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have one unobstructed access to a public street or highway. The following requirements shall apply to the development of the park street system: 
1.  All internal streets shall meet the minimum requirements of City of Greenville for all weather drives. 
2.  All cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with a minimum fifty (50) foot radius. 
3.  All park streets shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times by the owner(s) of the park. 
4.  Street design, base preparations, and surface construction materials shall meet the requirements of the county street and road standards. Written approval of the street system by the County Engineer shall be required before the first building permit is issued. 
e.  Off-Street Parking Requirements. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per lot shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
f.  Lot Area and Width. A manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten (10) contiguous acres with 30% for streets and other improvements. Individual unit spaces shall consist of 9,000 s.f. per unit. Individual unit spaces shall comply with per unit minimum for Multi-Family Districts as stated in Table 7.1. 
g.  Recreation and Other Community Facilities. Not less than ten (10%) percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other facilities. 
h.  Setbacks Required. 
1.  No manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than fifty (50') feet to any park perimeter property boundary. 
2.  Each manufactured home shall be setback from any other manufactured home by at least forty (40') feet. 
3.  There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25') feet between any individual manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking areas, or other common areas. 
i.  Perimeter Buffer Required. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other landscaping material at least fifty (50') feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of a manufactured home park. Provided, however, any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than twenty-five (25') feet from the perimeter of the park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
i.  Lighting. All manufactured home parks shall have lighting of height, spacing and intensity so that each home site's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor, or high or low pressure sodium lights shall be installed at not more than two hundred (200') feet intervals with a minimum height of eighteen (18') feet. 
j.  Water Supply. 
1.  Governmental Water System. All manufactured homes parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within one thousand (1,000') feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
k.  Sewerage Disposal and Treatment. All manufactured home parks shall be required to be added on to the City of Greenville sewerage system. Tap on fees are to be paid by the developer. Where existing sewer lines are more than 50' (feet) from the first residence to be added to the line, the developer is responsible for the cost of running the lines to the residence. 
l.  Electrical. All electric installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electric Code, as amended. 
m.  Refuse Collection Facilities. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two (2) individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of thirty (30) gallons of less for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall either be enclosed with a minimum of four (4') feet high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least eighteen (18") inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
n.  Service Buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the Georgia State Building Codes adopted by City of Greenville, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
1.  Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
2.  Community postal facilities. 
3.  Indoor community recreation areas. 
4.  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for park residents. 
o.  Miscellaneous Requirements. 
1.  Listings of Manufactured Homes Required. Every person, or other entity owning or operating a manufactured home park, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the Tax Commissioner of City of Greenville on January 1 and July 1 of each year with a complete list of all manufactured homes parked or rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a park operated by an entity. 
2.  Restrictions on Occupancy. A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in this ordinance upon inspection by the Building Inspector of City of Greenville. 
ARTICLE 13. - ADMINISTRATION 

13.1. - [Planning Commission and City Council to Administer Ordinance.] 
This Ordinance shall be administered by Planning Commission and the City Council of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
13.1-1.  Secretary to the Planning Commission. There is hereby created the Secretary of the Planning Commission of the City of Greenville, Georgia. 
1.  Duties and Authority. The Secretary shall administer the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and shall: 
a.  Serve as administrative secretary to the Planning Commission. 
b.  Maintain public records concerning the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including all maps, amendments, Certificates of Zoning Compliance, Special uses, Variances, and records of public hearings. 
c.  Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the Planning Commission, all of which must be approved by the City Council. 
d.  Undertake other relevant duties as may be delegated by the Mayor or City Council. 
13.2. - The City of Greenville Planning Commission. 
13.2-1.  There is hereby created a the City of Greenville, Georgia Planning Commission whose purpose is to carry out provisions of the City of Greenville Zoning Ordinance assigned to it and within applicable provisions of the laws of Georgia. This Zoning Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Maps, may be amended by the City of Greenville City Council on its own motion, on a petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
1.  Membership. Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City of Greenville Council. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members who are citizens of the City of Greenville and who shall be appointed for three (3) year terms, beginning on January 5 through January 5 of each year, or until their successors shall be appointed. No member shall hold any elective public office within the City of Greenville. Unexpired terms shall be filled by appointment of the City Council. Members are removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
2.  Procedure. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman (who shall be acting Chairman in the absence of the Chairman) on an annual basis. 
13.2-2.  The Chairman (or in his absence the Vice-Chairman) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The Chairman shall appoint any committees which may be found necessary. The Chairman shall be the deciding vote in any vote ending in a tie. 
13.2-3.  The Secretary to the Planning Commission shall conduct all correspondence of the Planning Commission; keep a minutes' book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the Commission. 
13.2-4.  Meetings of the Planning Commission will be held on an as needed basis. Notice must be provided to each member at least 48 hours prior to such meeting and that such other public notice as required by law is provided and abided by. The Secretary shall inform the members of the Planning Commission meetings. 
13.2-5.  Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. 
13.2-6.  No member of the Planning Commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the Planning Commission. 
No member of the Planning Commission shall hear or vote upon an application in which he or she has a direct or indirect, personal or financial interest. 
The order of business at the meeting shall be as follows: 
1.  Roll Call. 
2.  Review and approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
3.  Report of committees (if any). 
4.  Unfinished business. 
5.  Hearing of cases. 
6.  New business. 
13.2-7.  Failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the Planning Commission, and upon such resignation by other means, or other vacancies occurring in office, the Chairman or Secretary shall inform the City Council of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the Council may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
13.3. - Initiation of Amendments. 
13.3-1.  Applications to amend this Ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the Official Zoning Map(s). An application to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the City Council, or by any owner of property (or his/her designated agent) in the City. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s) may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, the Planning Commission, or be submitted to the Planning Commission by the City Council. Unless initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission, all applications to amend the Official Zoning Map(s) must be submitted by the owner (or his/her designated agent) and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as posted in City Hall, set by the City Council. Such authorization of property ownership shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the Zoning Map(s) affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, said intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the City Council. 
13.4. - Application for Amendments. 
13.4-1.  Each application to amend this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be filed with the City Clerk. The initiation of all amendments must be submitted by written request from the Planning Commission, or an individual property owner. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
13.4-2.  Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
1.  Name and address of applicant. 
2.  Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
3.  Proposed wording of text change. 
4.  Reason for amendment request. 
13.4-3.  Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
1.  A legal description of the tract(s) to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which the tract is located. 
2.  Seven copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; dimensions, acreage and location of tract(s); floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect, a planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
3.  When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
The disclosure required by this Section shall be filed at the time of application for the rezoning action. 
4.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; together with a written notarized authorization for the owner(s) agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
5.  A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. 
6.  Each zoning map amendment application, whether submitted by local government, or by a party other than local government shall include with it a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause and excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
e.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
13.4-4.  Submitted Application. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk who will notify the Chairman to the Planning Commission that an application has been filed. The Chairman will determine within five days of the filing if the application is complete and shall notify the Secretary to schedule a meeting of the Planning Commission to consider the application within ten days of an accepted, completed application. If the application is determined to be incomplete the Planning Commission shall notify the applicant in writing what is required to complete the application. The applicant then has five days to complete and return the application to the City Clerk. The application will then be added to the agenda of the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting after the Planning Commission has met and decided on a recommendation. Each application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Ordinance text or map shall be assessed a fee as posted in City Hall of the City of Greenville to defray administrative costs. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission. 
13.4-5.  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this Section shall have first appeared. An applicant may also withdraw an application before legal advertising and in writing to the City Clerk. 
13.4-6.  An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions, and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application[;] provided, however, that any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto shall be filed with the City Clerk at least five (5) days prior to the Planning Commission scheduled meeting. If any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this subsection, the Planning Commission, at the time of the meeting on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. The date designed for action on the application shall be set at a time which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection. 
13.4-7.  If after one (1) year from rezoning, the approved use has not been developed as stated the rezoning application or Building Permit has not been issued, the rezoning shall become invalid. A lot or parcel may revert to previously zoned status only after notification in writing to the applicant from the Planning Commission. Explanation of the delay shall be in writing from the applicant to the Planning Commission within five (5) business days of receiving written notification that the year deadline for development has occurred. After review of the explanation from the applicant the Planning Commission may extend the rezoning or require a new application for rezoning to be filed with the City Clerk. 
13.5. - Planning Study. 
13.5-1.  The Planning Commission, upon receiving an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), shall do the following: 
1.  With respect to an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), consider and evaluate each of the matters set forth in Article 13.4-3.6 a—f and Article 13.8-1 through [13.8-]11. 
2.  Consult with other departments of the City to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
3.  Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area. 
4.  Submit a written record of the investigation and recommendations by the Planning Commission, said report shall be a matter of public record. 
13.6. - Planning Commission Action. 
13.6-1.  The Planning Commission shall hold a meeting on each application in accordance with a schedule as stated in Article 13.2-4 or as needed. Recommendations on each application shall be submitted to the City Council. In addition, the Planning Commission shall with respect to each application consider each of the matters set forth in Article 13.4-3.6 a—f and Article 13.8-1 through [13.8-]11. As to each application, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The Planning Commission's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured. A written report of the Planning Commission's investigation and recommendation, shall be submitted to the City Council and shall be public record. The failure of the Planning Commission to take any action as to a particular petition within sixty (60) days of the acceptance of a completed application considered an approval recommendation thereof. 
13.7. - Public Notification. 
13.7-1.  Legal Notice. Due notice of the public hearing before the City Council shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for the City of Greenville in which is carried the legal advertisements of the City by advertising the application and date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing conducted by the City Council. If the application is for amendment to the Official Zoning Map(s), the notice also shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
13.7-2.  Signs Posted. An application, filed by a private citizen or agent of property owner, to amend the Official Zoning Map(s), the City of Greenville shall post a sign at least fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days in advance of the City Council's hearings, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing the present zoning district, the proposed zoning district, date, time, and place of the Public Hearing before the City Council. Signs shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning Procedures Act. If the City Council or Planning Commission initiates the zoning change request, signs are not required to be posted on the property. 
13.8. - Standards for the Exercise of Zoning Power. 
In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this ordinance, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following matters in reference to any rezoning application: 
13.8-1.  The existing land use patterns. 
13.8-2.  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets. 
13.8-3.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood. 
13.8-4.  Whether the proposed change will create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety. 
13.8-5.  Whether the proposed change will create adverse environmental impacts to water, erosion and sedimentation control regulations, or sewerage systems. 
13.8-10.  The extent to which the proposed change is consistent with the comprehensive plan, adopted by the City Council. 
13.8-11.  Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. 
13.9. - Conflict of Interest and Disclosure Rules. 
13.9-1.  Any, City of Greenville, City Council persons who know or reasonably should know that he or she: 
1.  Has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the City of Greenville; 
2.  Has a ten percent (10%) or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the City of Greenville; or 
3.  Has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in previous 1 and 2, shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the City of Greenville City Council as soon as he or she knows of its existence. Such an Official, which shall include members of the City Council, or Planning Commission also shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or herself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this section which result in the inability of the City Council to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the City Council shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the Georgia state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. § 36-671-1 et seq. [O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-3], as amended. 
13.9-2.  When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, and it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amounts and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five (5) calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
13.10. - Procedures for Public Hearing. 
13.10-1.  These rules apply to public hearings before the City Council. The word Chairman may be substituted for Mayor depending on who is presiding over the public hearing. There may be more than one hearing regarding amendments to the zoning ordinance, however, there shall be at least one hearing by the City Council. 
The Mayor of the City of Greenville City Council shall open the hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conducting of the hearing. The Mayor or designee of the Mayor may describe the authority and role of the City Council in any zoning decision. The Mayor or delegate of the Mayor shall chair the hearing and shall determine the relevance of any proposed comment or presentation to the City Council in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not relevant to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person addressing the City Council shall respond to questions of the City Council. Remarks shall be made to the Mayor only and not to other members of the Council or audience. Any unused portion of allotted time unused by either the applicant or opponent, shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The following rules of procedure govern the Public Hearing on rezoning or similar matters (special uses) before the City of Greenville. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
1.  Procedures relating to application, notice, and advertisement of items on the public hearing agenda shall conform to the requirements of Georgia law and the City of Greenville Ordinance. 
2.  Exercise of the zoning power shall conform to the standards expressed in the City of Greenville Zoning Ordinance, as most recently amended, as well as with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
3.  The City Clerk shall provide a limited number of copies of the policies required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which copies shall be available on request to interested members of the public. 
4.  Individuals desiring to address the City Council regarding an agenda item are required to contact the City Clerk. Applicants and/or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Failure of the applicant or his/her representative to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and a negative recommendation on the proposed amendment by the City of Greenville. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. No new issues shall be brought forth during the rebuttal by either the applicant or opponent. 
5.  In the event there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time or designate a spokesperson in order to complete their full presentation within the time allotment. 
6.  Any remark amounting to an attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, comment not factually supportable, comment in the form of an emotional outburst, comment not directed at the Mayor or delegate of the Mayor is considered to be non relevant to the purpose of the hearing and shall be ruled out of order. 
7.  The Mayor or his delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his/her representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the Mayor and Council prior to the hearing and any comments and other relevant information in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. At the public hearing, the City Council shall review the reports prepared by the Planning Commission. 
8.  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the Mayor or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the zoning decision. 
9.  Copies of these procedures shall be provided at each public hearing. 
13.11. - Action by City Council. 
The City Council shall consider the standards in 13.4-3.6 a—f in evaluating each application. So that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served, health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the City Council may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the Council to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice, is required. The final decision by the City Council shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant. Any amendment involving changes to the Official Map(s) must be made within three (3) business days after approval by the City Council. 
13.11-1.  After the presentation of positions by members of the public at the public hearing, and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council, a recommendation from the Planning Commission, and any City Official (Building Official) that may have comments or recommendations, shall be heard by the City Council. 
13.11-2.  Following the Planning Commission recommendation, Councilmembers may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue. 
13.11-3.  Following questions and/or comments by Councilmembers, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. A majority of affirmative votes is required to pass any motion before the City Council. 
13.11-4.  So that the purpose of the Ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured, the Council is authorized the following action with respect to any motion pending before it, consisting of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, denial, withdrawal, or deferral to a time and date specified in minutes of meeting. No official action shall be taken until there is a majority vote of a quorum of the City Council. 
APPEALS from decisions of the City Council shall be taken to the appropriate courts. 
13.12. - Building Permit Required. 
13.12-1.  No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the City Clerk. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
13.13. - Application for Building Permit. 
13.13-1.  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
13.14. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
13.14-1.  A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Inspector is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
1.  Any lot or a change in the use thereof. 
2.  A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building. 
3.  Any non-conforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. 
13.14-2.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this Ordinance. 
13.14-3.  A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
13.15. - Conditional Zoning and Conditional Use. 
13.15-1.  In order to maintain the health, safety, welfare, and morality of the citizens of the City of Greenville the City Council may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been granted. Conditions shall be in writing and purpose for the conditions shall be established. 
13.15-2.  Conditions placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the City Council meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2013) 
13.16. - Appeal Process for Conditional Zoning. 
Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the City of Greenville City Council only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required. 
13.17. - Special Uses. 
13.17-1.  The Planning Commission shall review and the City of Greenville City Council shall approve or deny special uses which are specifically authorized by this Ordinance. Public Hearing are required. (See hearing requirements.) 
13.17-2.  Conditions and Limitations. The Planning Commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this Ordinance in its review and the City of Greenville City Council may impose conditions, requirements or limitations deemed necessary. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the Building Official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been, or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated. The applicant shall file an Acceptance of Conditions form, provided by the City of Greenville, and the certificate shall be notarized. 
13.17-3.  Procedure. Application for a special use shall be filed with the City Clerk, and the Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to consider each request and make written recommendations to the City Council. A public hearing is required by the City Council (see Public Hearing Requirements). Upon receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission or after the thirty [(30)] day period has expired, the City Council shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General Location of existing structures and property lines. 
b.  Present zoning of adjacent property. 
c.  Existing use of adjacent property. 
d.  Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
e.  A legal description of the property. 
f.  Setbacks. 
g.  Parking spaces if applicable. 
13.17-4.  Specifically, in order to grant approval of a special use, the City Council must find the following standards have been met: 
a.  The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic which will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
b.  The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
c.  The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
d.  The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area. 
e.  The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
f.  Fee. Each application for a special use shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted in City Hall set by the City of Greenville to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
13.18. - Variances. 
13.18-1.  A variance will be authorized upon appeal, in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the Planning Commission that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
2.  The application of the zoning ordinance to this particular piece of property would create unnecessary hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
4.  Such conditions are not a result of any action of the property owner; 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 
13.18-2.  Conditions and Limitations. The Planning Commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this Ordinance. If at any time after a variance has been issued, the Building Official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a variance, the variance shall be terminated. 
13.18-3.  Procedure. Applications for variance shall be filed with the City Clerk, and the Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to consider each request. A due process hearing is required by the Planning Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General Location of existing structures and property lines. 
b.  Present Zoning of adjacent property. 
c.  Existing use of adjacent property. 
d.  Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
e.  A legal description of the property. 
f.  Setback distances. 
g.  Parking spaces if applicable. 
13.18-4.  Procedures for Due Process Hearing. Procedures for hearing before the Planning Commission shall be: 
1.  The hearing shall be chaired by the Chairman of the Planning Commission. 
2.  Evidence shall be produced by the applicant why the variance is necessary. 
3.  The Building Inspector may be called upon to testify to the rules and regulations in the zoning ordinance. 
4.  The applicant and the planning commission has the right to question witnesses. 
5.  The final decision to grant an applicant a variance shall be made by the Planning Commission. Any appeals of the variance decision shall be taken to the proper courts. 
13.18-5.  Fee. Each application for a variance shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted at the office of the City Clerk to defray administrative and notification costs. 
13.19. - Penalties. 
13.19-1.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the State of Georgia. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed separate offense. 
13.19-2.  In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, lot, or acreage is used in violation of this Ordinance, the City Council, Building Inspector, or any other appropriate authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent said violation in the case of each such building or use. 
13.20. - Compliance with Zoning Procedures Law. 
This Article of the City of Greenville Zoning Ordinance, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of same shall be available to the public upon request. 
ARTICLE 14. - LEGAL STATUS 

14.1. - Introduction. 
This Ordinance is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
14.2. - Conflicting Regulations. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances, regulations, or laws passed by the City Council of the City of Greenville, Georgia, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect. 
14.3. - Validity. 
Should any part, section, or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining portion of this Ordinance. 
14.4. - Adoption Date. 
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Greenville, Georgia is adopted after advertisement in the manner provided by law, by the City of Greenville, Georgia, after a public meeting held this _____ day of _______, 20___. The Zoning Ordinance was adopted at the City Council meeting held _____ day of _______, 20___. 
14.5. - Effective Date. 
Enforcement of these regulations shall be administered and become effective on the _____ day of _______, 20___. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1991 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code, as updated through August 6, 2013, which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 