THE CODE OF WARM SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
G. Robert Prater 
Mayor 
____________ 
Fred Woolfolk, Mayor Pro-Tem 
Margaret Long 
Geraldine Thompson 
Vicki Lucas 
Sabra McCullar 
City Council 
____________ 
Jeffrey Todd 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lisa Thompson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code, as supplemented through March 13, 2017, and ordinances adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Margaret Bielby, Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Lisa Thompson, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. 2017. 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 422), page 626. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Warm Springs, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia." Photographic or other copies of such map certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  In addition to all areas presently within the corporate boundaries of the City of Warm Springs, the corporate boundaries shall include the following: 
All that tract of land situate, lying and being in the City of Warm Springs, Meriwether County, Georgia, containing approximately 111.629 acres of real property, lying and being in Land Lots 121, 122, 135, and 136 of the 2nd land district, Warm Springs, Meriwether County, Georgia, shown on a plat of survey entitled 'City of Warm Springs' by Precision Planning, Inc., more particularly by Randall W. Dixon, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 1678, dated February 24, 1998, revised March 10, 1998, and June 8, 1998, recorded in Plat Book 19, Page 223, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Meriwether County, Georgia, said plat being incorporated herein and by reference made a part hereof. 
(2017 Ga. Laws (Act No. 115), p.1, § 1) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all the powers enumerated in section 1.13 of this Charter as well as all the powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
(a)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(b)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(c)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(d)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by O.C.G.A. title 48 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(e)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(f)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(g)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(h)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment. 
(i)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(j)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal fee and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(k)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(l)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(m)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(n)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(o)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(p)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(q)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(r)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(s)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(t)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(u)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(v)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(w)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(x)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency. 
(y)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(z)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(aa)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(bb)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(cc)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission. 
(dd)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(ee)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city. 
(ff)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alley, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(gg)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, construction, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(hh)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items. 
(ii)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(jj)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(kk)  Taxes—Ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(ll)  Taxes—Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(mm)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(nn)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(oo)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the stateof Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the state. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the stateof Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of five councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of members of the council; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service, be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city, and shall have paid all taxes and fees due to the city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the constitution of the State of Georgia, title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment, otherwise by an election, as provided for in section 5.14 of this Charter and in accordance with O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45 , or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with O.C.G.A. chapter 35 of title 36. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Fiduciary capacity. Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to O.C.G.A. chapter 14 of title 50, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in subsection (h)(1) of this section shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof; and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Monday in January in the year following the year in which a city election for mayor and councilmembers is held. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly affirm that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmembers presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairs and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting of the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Warm Springs" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in section 2.24 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2.22(b) of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months preceding the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of service. The mayor shall forfeit the office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.28. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative power granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove all officers, department heads, and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended operating budget and capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(7)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in section 2.19(b) of this Charter; 
(8)  Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(9)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; and 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.30. - Mayor pro tem; selection; duties. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. The city council by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tem is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointive officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the mayor, with confirmation by the city council required for removal. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Municipal court; creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Warm Springs. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction by fine or imprisonment or both fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.13. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the superior court of Meriwether County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.14. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 21, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
Beginning with the year 2005 and every four years thereafter, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, there shall be an election for the mayor and city council. The terms of office shall begin on January 1 following the November election. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining may order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official or, at its option, the city council or those remaining may appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, any special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 21, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 21, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in O.C.G.A. title 45 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the superior court of Meriwether County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the superior court of Meriwether County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the city. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fa.'s.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 15 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 15 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be required by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part hereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.15. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the Town of Bullochville, approved December 20, 1893 (Ga. L. 1893, p. 192), as amended, particularly by an Act incorporating the City of Warm Springs, approved January 30, 1946 (Ga. L.1946, p. 626), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Warm Springs, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Warm Springs City Code." 
(Code 2002, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following rules of construction and definitions shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the city council unless the context requires otherwise. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia, as amended. 
Chief of police, city marshal. The terms "chief of police," "marshal" and "city marshal" are synonymous. 
City. The term "city" or "this city" means the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Warm Springs, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council, city council, mayor and council, mayor and city council. The term "council," "city council," "mayor and council" or "mayor and city council" means the mayor and council of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" means Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
State Law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street and road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
(Code 2002, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(b)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. 
(Code 2002, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of Warm Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Warm Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission of such portions from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by: a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or to both such fine and imprisonment, or any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the city court. 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violations continue is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 2002, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-3, 36-35-6(a)(2); authority of municipal judge to impose community service, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2002, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of the Code of the city, as amended, and ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2002, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any city officer or city employee. 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a planning commission, including joint commissions. 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations. 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision. 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 2002, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and city council. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-19. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held on the second Monday of each month. 
(Code 2002, § 2-31; Ord. of 1-4-1965) 
Secs. 2-20—2-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-42—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics and conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Purpose of division. 
It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Code 2002, § 2-81; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-01) 
Sec. 2-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official and official mean the mayor, members of the city council, city clerk or deputy city clerk, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. The terms "city official" and "official" include individuals appointed by the mayor and council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this division by the mayor and council. 
Compensation means any benefit conferred upon or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered. 
Conflict of interest means not only a personal interest, but also a professional or nonpecuniary interest, such as arises when the city attorney is precluded from representing one public servant because of the city attorney's preexisting attorney-client relationship with another public servant. 
Decision making means the exercise of any discretionary public power in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations, by any public servant whose action pertains to a matter in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant might receive a personal benefit. 
Disclosure means to declare to the mayor and council and the city clerk that a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest exists or may exist, and that such declaration is recorded in the official minutes of the mayor and council which informs the public of the conflict or potential conflict. 
Employee means a person, other than an elected public officer, employed and paid a salary to work for the city, whether full-time, part-time, or on a contract basis, and including those officially selected but not yet serving; but does not include an independent contractor; and for purposes of establishing ethical obligations under this division and for no other purpose, the term "employee" includes volunteers, notwithstanding the fact that they are unpaid. 
Gift means any benefit or thing or act of value which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest; or the promise that such things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Immediate family means a public servant's spouse; a public servant's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption; a public servant's parents, parents-in-law, sisters, sisters-in-law, brothers, brothers-in-law, stepparents, stepbrothers or stepsisters; and an individual claimed by the public servant or the public servant's spouse as a dependent under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Partner in interest means a member of the public servant's immediate family; a business with which the public servant or a member of the public servant's immediate family is associated; or any other person with whom the public servant or a member of his immediate family is in business. 
(Code 2002, § 2-82; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-02) 
Sec. 2-73. - Penalties for violation of division. 
Any person found to have violated any provisions of this division may be subject to written and oral reprimand or public censure by the mayor and council, board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member, and/or request for resignation by the mayor and council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
(Code 2002, § 2-83; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-07) 
Sec. 2-74. - Right to appeal. 
Any final decision by the mayor and council pursuant to this divisionfor city councilmembers shall be reviewable by the county superior court. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the mayor and council which supported the decision of the mayor and council; provided, however, that no action of the mayor and council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this division shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Code 2002, § 2-84; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-08) 
Sec. 2-75. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Code 2002, § 2-85; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-05) 
Sec. 2-76. - Prohibitions and standards of conduct. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No councilmember or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the mayor and council, or board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(d)  No councilmember or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any city official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the mayor and council and the city clerk. 
(e)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(f)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(g)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation received, while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair the judgement or performance of city duties. 
(h)  No city official or employee shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(i)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at-large. 
(j)  No city official or employee shall intentionally use or disclose information gained in the course of, or by reason of, his official position or activities in any way that could result in the receipt of any personal benefit for the official or employee, for a partner in interest of that official or employee, or for any other person, if the information is not public information or if he has not been authorized to communicate it to the public. This subsection shall not: 
(1)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information to incumbent public servants to whose duties the information may be pertinent; 
(2)  Prevent any public servant from reporting violations of this division or other illegal acts to the proper authorities; or 
(3)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information the disclosure of which is required by law. 
(Code 2002, § 2-86; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-03) 
Sec. 2-77. - Candidates; honesty in applications for positions. 
No person seeking to become a public official, employee, contractor, volunteer or appointee to any public position shall make any false or materially misleading statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification, appointment or investigation, or in any manner commit any fraud, conceal any wrongdoing or knowingly withhold information about wrongdoing in connection with employment or service with the city or in connection with a work-related contract or service of any city public servant. 
(Code 2002, § 2-88; Ord. of 2-14-2000, § 9-06) 
Secs. 2-78—2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-2), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of a debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and, for a natural person, includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-3), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-102. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer and garbage pickup. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: none. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-4), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-103. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, such as a valid government issued driver's license or identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-5), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-104. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password shall be changed on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the mayor and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the mayor and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-6), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-105. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the city, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the city. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the city. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the city. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-8), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-106. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the mayor. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the mayor who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the mayor, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the mayor: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector, in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the mayor. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the mayor, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the mayor, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the mayor: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-9), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-107. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-10), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-108. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The mayor is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk or city attorney, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the mayor at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangement; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-11), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-109. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city clerk shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1(40-12), 9-14-2009) 
Secs. 2-110—2-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 2-161. - Creation. 
The mayor and council hereby create the planning commission. 
(Code 2002, § 2-191; Ord. of 9-13-1971, § 1) 
Sec. 2-162. - Number of members. 
The planning commission shall be composed of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. Ex officio members of the planning commission who hold public office shall serve on the planning commission during the time they hold public office. 
(Code 2002, § 2-192; Ord. of 9-13-1971, § 2) 
Sec. 2-163. - Terms of office of members. 
The first four members appointed to the planning commission shall serve for a period of four years, and their successors shall serve for a similar period. The next three members appointed to the planning commission shall serve for a period of three years, and their successors shall serve for a similar period. 
(Code 2002, § 2-193; Ord. of 9-13-1971, § 3) 
Sec. 2-164. - Removal of members. 
The mayor and council may remove any member of the planning commission for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
(Code 2002, § 2-194; Ord. of 9-13-1971, § 4) 
Secs. 2-165—2-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-182. - Conduct of elections. 
The governing authority of the city does hereby authorize the county board of elections to conduct any and all elections within the city pursuant to the state election code and to perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified therein. With reference to any such election, the city shall pay to the county board of elections such cost incurred in performing those elections functions requested to be performed as memorialized by contract. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2012, § 1(2-220)) 
Secs. 2-183—2-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL COURT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— City courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq.; bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-203. - Terms of court; when sessions held. 
(a)  The terms of court for the municipal court of the city shall commence on the first Monday in February, May, August and November. 
(b)  Regular sessions of the municipal court shall be held at such hours and upon such days as fixed from time to time by the municipal court judge as in his discretion shall be required for the proper administration and adjudication of the court calendar. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-250)) 
Sec. 2-204. - Records. 
(a)  The clerk of court shall keep a criminal docket whereon he shall docket all cases of persons charged with violation of the city ordinances or state statutes, the time of docketing the same, the offense charged, the name of the arresting officers, the final judgment and sentence and other entries to show the progress of the case and its final disposition. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall also keep the other books and records of the municipal court. Such records shall show an accurate account of all moneys handled by the court. 
(c)  The clerk shall be responsible for maintenance of pre-adjudication documents, maintenance of the court docket, preparation of the court calendar, administering the municipal court while in session at the discretion of the municipal judge, maintenance of all financial records of the municipal court including preparation of bank deposits, reporting dispositions of adjudicated cases to the appropriate agency, forwarding of adjudicated arrest and booking reports to the chief of police, transmitting adjudicated traffic citations and drivers licenses to the department of public safety and forwarding a copy of traffic citations to the chief of police for filing. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-251)) 
Sec. 2-205. - Superior court rules. 
The practice in the municipal court shall be governed by the rules of the superior court as far as practicable. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-252)) 
Sec. 2-206. - Continuances. 
In all cases, the party making an application for a continuance must show that he has used due diligence. All applications for continuances are addressed to the sound legal discretion of the court and, if not expressly provided for, shall be granted or refused as the ends of justice may require. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-253)) 
Sec. 2-207. - Administrative fee. 
In addition to any fine, forfeiture, cost or other monetary penalty imposed upon a defendant, there shall be assessed an administrative fee of $35.00, which shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-254)) 
Sec. 2-208. - Failure to appear. 
Any person duly summoned, or issued a citation, to appear before the municipal judge, who fails, neglects or refuses to appear, without sufficient excuse, may be fined for contempt by the municipal judge; and the accused, if to be found in the city, shall be arrested by the police and brought before the municipal judge for trial, at such time as the judge may designate. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(2), § 1(2-255)) 
Sec. 2-209. - Equipment and technology fee. 
There shall be imposed by the municipal court of the city, an equipment and technology surcharge in the amount of $15.00 per offense for all offenses except O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said technology surcharge to be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city, under the administration of the chief of police, to support the equipment and technology needs of the police department and municipal court functions. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016, § 1(18-123)) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale, and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; general assembly authorized to provide by general law for use of proceeds of state alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment relating to alcohol and drug abuse, Ga. Const. art. III, § IX, ¶ VI(e). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(13). 
Open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
Package store license means a license issued to a retail dealer for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine, in sealed containers, for consumption off the premises, generally known and designated as sale of malt beverages or wine "to go." 
Pouring license means a license issued to the operator of an eating establishment for the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises of the establishment. 
Prohibited locations means it shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages or be in possession of an open container of alcoholic beverages while on the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, other public property of the city or other public places (duly licensed establishments excepted) or while on private property without the express consent of the owner. 
Retail dealer means any person selling malt beverages or wine, in unbroken packages, directly to the consumer. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 2002, §§ 4-1, 4-2; Ord. of 3-15-1999, § 14-2; Ord. of 7-10-2000, §§ 32-201, 32-215) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(24). 
Sec. 4-2. - State law provisions to govern matters not covered by chapter. 
All other matters pertaining to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages not specifically covered in this chapter shall be governed by O.C.G.A. title 3, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2002, § 4-3; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-218) 
Secs. 4-3—4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WINE AND BEER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-25. - Excise tax; levy; rate. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80, the city does hereby set and levy upon the sale of malt beverages within the city an excise tax as follows: 
(1)  On containers consisting of barrels or bulk containers and containing what is commonly known as tap or draft beer, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold, containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, other than barrels or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Code 2002, § 4-41; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-216) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 4-26. - Sanitary conditions of premises used for sales. 
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 2002, § 4-42; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-207) 
Sec. 4-27. - Required distances of premises from churches and schools; measurement. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages within 100 yards of any church or within 200 yards of any school or playground. Such distances shall be measured as follows: 
(1)  From the property line of the tract on which is located the business regulated under this article; 
(2)  To the property line of the tract on which is located the church, school, or playground; and 
(3)  Along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the two property lines. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. This section shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the license application. 
(Code 2002, § 4-43; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-208) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campuses, O.C.G.A § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-28. - Hours for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. Monday. 
(Code 2002, § 4-44; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-212) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-29. - Closing times for sales for consumption establishments. 
All business establishments which sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within the city limits are required to close to the public no later than 12:00 midnight, and such establishments are required to remove all patrons from the premises no later than 1:00 a.m. 
(Code 2002, § 4-45; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-213) 
Sec. 4-30. - Sales near polling places. 
No person shall sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open for voting during an election. 
(Code 2002, § 4-46; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-214) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(3). 
Sec. 4-31. - Sales to persons under the age of 21 years. 
No licensee shall furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any person in his employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. The licensee shall be held responsible for any such sale made by his employees or others in the licensed business premises. The prohibition of this section includes the sale, gift or any other furnishing of alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years. 
(Code 2002, § 4-47; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-209) 
State Law reference— Sales to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et seq. 
Sec. 4-32. - Posting of notice to persons under the age of 21 years. 
The holder of any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a notice with letters not less than one inch in height which shall be clearly visible to all customers entering the establishment as follows: "Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Persons Under 21 is Strictly Prohibited." 
(Code 2002, § 4-48; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-210) 
State Law reference— Posting of laws regarding sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 4-33. - Employment of persons under the age of 21 years. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in his employment under the age of 21 years to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for wine or malt beverages; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under the age of 21 years who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling wine or malt beverages which is sold for consumption off the premises, so long as such person under the age of 21 years is under the supervision of at least one adult, whether such adult is the licensee or another employee. 
(Code 2002, § 4-49; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-211) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on employment of persons under age 18 years, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Secs. 4-34—4-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local licensing of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 3-3-2; municipal licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42. 

Sec. 4-55. - Required. 
(a)  Each applicant for a pouring license shall have his fingerprints taken by an authorized official, and shall be subject to a criminal background check. Such background check shall be received only by the chief of police, and the city council shall seek his recommendation for or against approval per section 4-58(10) and, if necessary, in closed session. 
(b)  No application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages within this city shall be acted upon by the mayor and council until after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the mayor and council at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 2002, § 4-71; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-202; Ord. of 8-13-2007) 
State Law reference— Fingerprints of applicants, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; license required, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40, 3-6-40. 
Sec. 4-56. - Pouring license; additional requirements. 
(a)  Each applicant for a pouring license shall have his fingerprints taken by an authorized official, and shall be subject to a criminal background check. Such background check shall be received only by the chief of police, and the city council shall seek his recommendation for or against approval per section 4-58(10) and, if necessary, in closed session. 
(b)  No pouring license shall be issued to any establishment that does not maintain a minimum of 50 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of food. 
(c)  Such licensee shall submit a report, on a form proscribed by the city, to the city clerk within 15 days following the end of each calendar quarter, which form shall set forth the gross dollar sales of food and alcoholic beverages for the preceding three months. 
(d)  The books and records of a licensed establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be subject to audit by the city clerk upon reasonable notice to the person designated as the keeper of such records. 
(Code 2002, § 4-72; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-203; Ord. of 8-13-2007) 
Sec. 4-57. - Fees. 
The annual license fees for retail dealers and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages shall be as determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 4-73; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-204) 
State Law reference— Local malt beverage license fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42. 
Sec. 4-58. - Factors for mayor and council consideration. 
The mayor and council, in passing upon an initial application for a license, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments selling alcoholic beverages to the proposed location. 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(5)  Whether the location would tend to increase or promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(6)  The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the general vicinity of the proposed location. 
(7)  The information set forth in the application. 
(8)  Whether any license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the mayor and council. 
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever sold alcoholic beverages in the municipality. 
(10)  The results of any criminal background check. 
(Code 2002, § 4-74; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-205) 
Sec. 4-59. - Location restrictions. 
A license issued under the provisions of this division shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 2002, § 4-75; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 32-206) 
Secs. 4-60—4-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FARM WINERIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— License for manufacture and sale by farm wineries, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1. 

Sec. 4-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery and tasting room shall be defined according to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, as presently constituted and as may be hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-100)) 
Sec. 4-78. - Farm winery operations. 
(a)  Farm wineries licensed under this article shall be authorized to sell the wine of such licensed farm winery and the wine of any other state farm winery licensee in the state at retail in a tasting room located within the municipality of the city for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises, including the sale of wine by the glass, whether by drink or for tasting. 
(b)  No person shall operate a farm winery or tasting room within the city until an appropriate license has been issued by the city, and further until such time as the license has been granted by the state department of revenue. 
(c)  The license created in accordance with this article shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accordance with such statutes. No license is hereby created authorizing any other use. 
(d)  Any license under this article must meet all of the requirements under this article for an alcoholic beverages license in the city, including, but not limited to, premises location, distance, hours of sale and applicant qualifications. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-101)) 
Sec. 4-79. - Regulations. 
No holder of a license under this article, nor an agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to a minor. 
(2)  Sell wine in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. Monday. 
(3)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd, immoral conduct or practices. 
(4)  Maintain any type of amusement music machine or video game or utilize any device which amplifies music or voice beyond the confines of the tasting room facility. 
(5)  Allow any purchase made on the licensed premises be taken therefrom until put in a bag or otherwise securely wrapped in paper by the proprietor or clerk operating the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-102)) 
Sec. 4-80. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(b)  A license shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article, any future resolution pertaining thereto, or regulations adopted by this body. 
(c)  The license may be suspended or revoked by the city council for any violation of this article; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceased to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(d)  Prior to the suspension or revocation of the license by the city council, the city shall give written notice to the licensee of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing before the city council shall be held. Service of such notice shall be by personal service or certified mail. The licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine witnesses at any such hearing. The city council shall make a decision regarding revocation or suspension within five days from the date of the hearing, which decision shall be in writing. Any appeal of said decision shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-103)) 
Sec. 4-81. - Licenses, fees, and taxes. 
(a)  The applicant for a domestic winery or farm winery license shall pay the annual license fee of $325.00. 
(b)  The applicant for a farm winery tasting room shall pay the annual license fee $325.00 for each tasting room location. 
(c)  The applicant for a license under this article shall pay to the clerk of the city the sum of $325.00 as an annual license fee for the operation of one year beginning on or after January 1 and ending on December 31 of such year. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-104)) 
Sec. 4-82. - Authority to issue licenses. 
Licenses shall be issued only upon the approval of the city. Applications for said licenses shall be presented to the governing authority, and all fees provided for shall be paid to the clerk of said body in the amount and at the time hereinbefore specified. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-105)) 
Sec. 4-83. - Regulations, future ordinances, and revocation of licenses. 
All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to such regulations which this body may deem advisable for the proper control and regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine. This article and such regulations may be from time to time amended. All such licenses issued pursuant to this article and any such regulations shall be expressly subject to the provisions of the regulations, as may be then or thereafter in force, and subsequent ordinances. All such licenses shall be nontransferable and shall convey to the licensee no property right, but only a privilege, which may be revoked by this body. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-106)) 
Sec. 4-84. - Limited license. 
The farm winery license hereunder is limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state and allows the licensee to perform all acts as allowed by such state legislation in such tasting rooms. No license is created by the adoption of this article authorizing any other uses. 
(Ord. of 5-12-2014, § 1(4-107)) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; vicious animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; substances and procedures for euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelters, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1.; impounding of animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.2; return of animal to owner, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.3; notification to owner of impoundment of animal, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any creature, domestic or wild. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of some person either by leash, cord, chain, or other restraint. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at large; 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owners, molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
(3)  Chases vehicles; 
(4)  Excessively makes disturbing noises including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5)  Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(7)  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained; or 
(8)  Attacks other domestic animals. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-1)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Citation and/or impoundment of animals running at large. 
(a)  The city may impound any animal running at large in the city, or may issue a citation to the owner, or both. 
(b)  Impounded animals will be forwarded to the county, and the rules of said county as to notice, redemption or other disposition of said animal shall apply. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-2)) 
Sec. 6-3. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Any impounded animal may be destroyed after one week following the notice, as provided in section 6-2, unless the owner claims the animal and pays a fee established by the city, plus all fees incurred in capturing and impoundment. 
(b)  Such sums do not include any fines that may result from citations issued for violation of this section. 
(c)  If any dead animal is found upon a public right-of-way, the city may remove and dispose of it and charge the owner a fee, depending upon the costs incurred by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-3)) 
Sec. 6-4. - Public nuisance animals. 
The harboring of any animal found to be dangerous or a public nuisance is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-4)) 
Sec. 6-5. - Restraint of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of each dog or cat within the city shall keep such animal from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. Dogs shall at all times be: 
(1)  Kept within a proper enclosure from which such animal cannot escape; 
(2)  Restrained upon the owner's property by a substantial chain, cable, rope or other device from which such animal cannot escape so as to not reach any adjoining property or public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Restrained on a leash and accompanied by the owner or another responsible person. 
(b)  Permanent tethering of animals prohibited. Permanent tethering is defined as keeping an animal tethered for 12 or more hours in a 24-hour period. Permanent tethering of an animal is prohibited and considered cruelty to animals as defined in section 6-9. Temporary or occasional tethering is allowed with the following conditions: 
(1)  Only one animal may be attached to each tethering line, running cable line or trolley system. 
(2)  No animal may be attached to a tether line, running cable or trolley system between the hours 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Tethers and cables attaching the animal must be made of substance which cannot be chewed into by the animal nor shall it weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the animal tethered. 
(4)  No log or heavy chains may be used to tether an animal. 
(5)  A tether or cable line or trolley system must have a working swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the animal. 
(6)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to appropriate food, clean water, and adequate shelter. 
(7)  The tether, cable or trolley system must be attached to a properly fitted harness or collar and with enough room between the collar and the animal's throat through which two fingers of an adult may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of using a tether line, cable line or trolley system. 
(8)  Sufficient distance shall be maintained from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the tether line or cable, from extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence. 
(9)  No more than three animals are allowed to be tethered and each animal must be able to have its own space without being able to intermingle or get entangled. 
(c)  Wherever an animal is kept in such manner which constitutes a nuisance, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, an animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
(d)  Wherever a dog is allowed to roam free in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, a citation shall be issued for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-5)) 
Sec. 6-6. - Restraint of animals. 
The owner of any animal shall not allow such animal to run at large in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-6)) 
Sec. 6-7. - Keeping of livestock. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "livestock" means domestic animals and fowl customarily kept on a farm, including, but not limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, sheep, goats, ducks, geese, chickens and turkeys. 
(b)  No livestock shall be permitted on a lot containing two or less acres. On lots greater than two and less than ten acres, there shall be allowed one livestock animal per acre, or its portion. For lots in excess of ten acres, there shall be no restriction as to the number of livestock animals allowed. 
(c)  On any lot upon which livestock are lawfully kept as allowed in this section, all such livestock shall be kept at least 50 feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-7)) 
Sec. 6-8. - Rabies inoculation of dogs and cats. 
All dogs and cats within the city are required to be inoculated against rabies. It is further required that all dogs and cats display a tag (e.g., metal or plastic tags or microchips) clearly showing the inoculation identification number and the owner's name and address. Any animal subject to this section and running at large, whose owner fails to comply, is subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-8)) 
Sec. 6-9. - Cruelty to animals. 
No person shall unnecessarily overload, overdrive, torture, deprive of necessary sustenance or shelter, or unnecessarily or cruelly beat, mutilate, or kill any domestic animal, or cause such action to be done, or carry in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-9)) 
Sec. 6-10. - Confinement without sustenance; abandonment. 
No person shall impound or confine any animal in any place or fail to supply the animal, during such confinement, with a sufficient quantity of good, wholesome food and water, or keep any animal in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, or abandon any animal. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-10)) 
Sec. 6-11. - Poisoning animals. 
No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animals any substance that is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-11)) 
Sec. 6-12. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The city is declared to be a bird sanctuary; and no wild bird shall be knowingly killed in the city by any person except for nuisance birds such as starlings, and then only at the direction of the mayor and city council on a motion adopted to that effect. 
(b)  No other wild game may be shot or trapped in the city except by order of the police chief. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-12)) 
Sec. 6-13. - Noisy or offensive animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any fowl or animal in the city in such manner as to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-13)) 
Sec. 6-14. - Dead animals; disposition. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person, or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to the person to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of the animal or causing the animal to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-14)) 
Sec. 6-15. - Hogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or maintain any hogs, pigs or any hog sty or other place for housing such animals within the city. Each day a person is in violation of this section shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-15)) 
Sec. 6-16. - Transport of dogs. 
(a)  No dog shall be transported in the open bed of a pick-up truck unless the pick-up has side and tail rails at least 24 inches in height and has installed a means to prevent the dog from being thrown, falling or jumping from the vehicle by either being cross tethered to the vehicle or enclosed by a portable kennel, container or cage. 
(b)  No dog shall be left in an open truck bed unattended while parked within the city limits unless the dog is enclosed in a portable kennel, container or cage. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to a dog used by a farmer or farm employee while engaged in fanning or a hunting dog being used by a licensed hunter during legal hunting season or a dog in training for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-16)) 
Secs. 6-17—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-36. - Implementation of state law. 
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the dangerous dog control ordinance of the city. It is the intention of the governing authority of the city by adoption of this article to implement the provisions of the "Responsible Dog Ownership Law" of the state, formerly known as the dangerous dog control law, adopted and approved by the general assembly of the state on April 4, 1988, and made effective for enforcement purposes on January 1, 1989, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended (1988 Ga. Laws, pages 824—834). 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-30)) 
Sec. 6-37. - Hearing board. 
All hearings required to be conducted pursuant to this article shall be held and conducted by an animal control board consisting of no fewer than three nor more than five members, as three no more than five appointed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-31)) 
Sec. 6-38. - Dog control officer; position created. 
There is hereby created in the city the position of dog control officer as provided in and contemplated by the provisions of the responsible dog ownership law referenced herein; immediately upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the mayor and council is hereby authorized and directed to appoint an individual as dog control officer of the city to carry out the duties and responsibilities as provided in the responsible dog ownership law of the state. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2015(1), § 1(6-32)) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); State Minimum Standard Codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i); enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, the latest editions of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended by the department of community affairs. 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code; and 
(2)  International Existing Building Code. 
(b)  Codes which are to be enforced by building official. The rules, regulations, codes, or standards heretofore adopted, together with those state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(VIII), to-wit: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments; 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments; 
(3)  Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015; 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015; 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015; 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 edition; 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2011 and 2012; 
which codes have statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the building official or his designee in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  The edition of such codes as currently adopted by the state department of community affairs shall be used and enforced, except where a subsequently published edition of any such code has been adopted by the state department of community affairs, with approval of its board, or such code has been amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-1)) 
Sec. 8-2. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of building official. The building official, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes: 
(1)  To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the city in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to ensure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)  With consent of the city administrator, under the budgetary and personnel regulations of said city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)  To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)  To study and make recommendations to the city administrator relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)  To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority contained in the O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors shall be applicable in the city. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the building official, set forth in this section, may, by private or intergovernmental contract approved by the mayor and council, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by the building official of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. When such contract has been entered and spread upon the official minutes of the council, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city building official as if fully performed directly by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-2)) 
Sec. 8-3. - Limitations of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of said city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional, and contractor to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-3)) 
Sec. 8-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such building or structure from the building official. Separate permits are required for grading, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and low-voltage. 
(b)  Fees. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the mayor and council, as may be revised from time to time. 
(c)  Term. Permits shall generally be good for six months from date of issuance; provided that if the work is not completed within the initial permit term, but has been diligently pursued, the permit may be extended, without additional charge, for successive three-month terms, so long as the work continues to be diligently prosecuted. 
(d)  Revocation for suspension or abandonment. If work authorized by a permit is suspended or abandoned, after the initial term, for a period of 30 days, without good cause shown to the building official, the permit may be revoked upon written notification to the permit holder. Revocations of permits for abandonment are not appealable to the mayor and council. 
(e)  State licensing required. No person shall engage in electrical, plumbing, mechanical, low-voltage, or utility contracting on any work within the city unless licensed by the state. Where a state license is required, every applicant for a permit shall furnish proof, at time of application, that he or the person contracted to do the work holds a valid state license in good standing. Failure to meet this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-4)) 
Sec. 8-5. - Written documentation; payment of fee required for issuance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, in addition to the information requested on the permit application, the building official may require tests, plans and specifications, plats, and other written documentation from engineers, architects, surveyors, and other professionals to ensure that full compliance with all permitting requirements of the state minimum standard codes and applicable laws have been met. No permits shall issue on any project where the structure to be built or improved thereon is a special hazard structure or the use to be conducted therein is a special hazard use, without first obtaining the approval of building plans by the state fire marshal's office. Where a project is subject to permitting under the state soil erosion and sedimentation control law, no permit shall issue for any land-disturbance activity unless approved plans are received from the district soil conservation office and all required stabilization facilities are in place, and ready for inspection. All buildings and structures intended for human occupancy shall have a safe source of drinking water and sanitary disposal; no permit shall issue for any building or structure which does not have access to public water and sewer unless plans for a well and/or septic tank have been approved by the county health department. All permits shall be conditioned upon the application and supporting data, which is deemed incorporated into and made a material part or term of the permission granted. No permit shall issue until all requisite fees have been paid in full, and the mayor and council by resolution will establish said fees from time to time. For all permits issued under this chapter for the demolition of a structure in the city, the applicant shall provide good and sufficient bond, cash bond, or letter-of-credit in the full value of the anticipated demolition cost to ensure proper completion. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-5)) 
Sec. 8-6. - Cessation of work. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, system or component therein, that is being done contrary to the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or in violation of any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given in writing, directed to the owner of the property and to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency situation exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-6)) 
Sec. 8-7. - Revocation of permit for false statement or misrepresentation. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the event he finds there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The building official may also revoke a permit upon determining that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of the building or structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of state minimum standard codes; provided the work was stopped in accordance with section 8-6 and the permittee has not met the conditions for resuming the work after a reasonable period for compliance has been granted. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-7)) 
Sec. 8-8. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or whenever the building official has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official, or his designee, may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter; provided if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or occupant. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official may apply to the judge of the city municipal court for an administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-8)) 
Sec. 8-9. - Service of orders, rulings, etc.; appeals. 
All decisions, orders and rulings of the building official shall be in writing and served upon the applicant, permit holder, owner of property affected or his agent, and, if applicable, persons in possession or occupancy of affected premises. Where such decisions cannot be personally served, service shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address as shown on official government records. Any party aggrieved by a decision, order or ruling of the building official may appeal such decision to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal, within 30 days, with the city clerk; provided, however, in any case where the building official has issued an order for the repair, closing or vacating of a building or structure on grounds it is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous so as to constitute a public nuisance, no appeal shall be taken and the aggrieved party will be summoned to appear for hearing before the municipal court. A written ruling by the mayor and council shall be deemed final, subject to review by the superior court for errors of law by petition for writ of certiorari, filed within 30 days. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-9)) 
Sec. 8-10. - Variances. 
(a)  In those limited cases where the state minimum standard codes allow a local variance based upon hardship, the mayor and council may, upon finding that strict enforcement of the state minimum standard codes would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of such codes and the public interest, grant a variance, subject to finding, in writing, all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or system involved and which are not applicable to others similarly situated; 
(2)  That the special condition and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting a variance will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by the codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of such codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Applications for variance shall be advertised not less than 15 days prior to conducting an evidentiary hearing before the mayor and council. Such hearing shall be informally conducted, with the applicant having the burden of proof. Each decision of the mayor and council shall recite the factual findings underlying its decision and the reasons for such decision. In granting a variance, the mayor and council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the codes, including a reasonable time limit in which the variance is required to be commenced or completed, or both. A copy of the mayor and council's written decision shall immediately be filed in its minutes of the hearing at which the variance was considered and a copy promptly served upon all affected parties. Decisions of the mayor and council shall be final, subject to applicable remedies afforded by law. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-10)) 
Sec. 8-11. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any provision of the state minimum standard codes, or the permissive codes and construction standards adopted by this chapter, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished any building, structure, or system therein in violation of this chapter shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of this city. Upon trial, if convicted, such violation shall carry a fine according to the general penalties provision of this Code. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Violations of this chapter are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-11)) 
Sec. 8-12. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of interpretation of the state minimum standard codes, the definitions of terms found in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 shall control over the definitions of the same or similar terms as found in such codes or this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(1), § 1(8-12)) 
Secs. 8-13—8-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-43. - Findings by city. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the corporate limits of the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and are not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance to be in force within the city, or general nuisance law, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that the public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that within the corporate limits of the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Moreover, the mayor and council find that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes, which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. Finally, it is the intent of the governing authority to invoke the procedures hereafter codified for private property which constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  In contemplation of the remedies of such situations as provided under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, the city adopts this article relating to unsafe buildings under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b) et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 8-31; Ord. of 10-13-2003(1)) 
Sec. 8-44. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)  Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(b)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section. In addition: 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2, chapter 13, title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located, any vested right, title or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building or structure or the lot, tract or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupation tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such offer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located, and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(c)  Duties of owners; appointment of public officer. 
(1)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(2)  The mayor and council of the city hereby appoint and designate the county building inspector, and his designee, as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(d)  Other remedies not precluded. 
(1)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in courts of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Code 2002, § 8-33; Ord. of 10-13-2003(1)) 
Sec. 8-45. - Procedures; notice; hearing; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by the governing authority, a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated, or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court of the city, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. The court may, for good cause shown, continue the hearing to a date and time certain. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property; or 
(3)  For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factored in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 39A of title 31, qualified building contractors or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(e)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 8-46(d). The clerk of the superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of the superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. chapter 4, title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The mayor and council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(f)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Code 2002, § 8-34; Ord. of 10-13-2003(1)) 
Sec. 8-46. - Standards; powers; service of complaints. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous of injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(b)  The public officer designated in this article shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this article, including the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use, or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(c)  Service of complaints. 
(1)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. article 5, chapter 4 of title 48; or 
c.  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(2)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c)(3) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate or incompetent person, or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of, and to protect the rights of, such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(6)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(7)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(d)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(e)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(Code 2002, § 8-35; Ord. of 10-13-2003(1)) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLEA MARKETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flea market vendors record keeping, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-360 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flea market means the sale by multiple parties on an irregular basis of items retail within a stall. 
Licensee means the person receiving the general license for a flea market. The term "licensee" means such person shall be directly responsible for subletting booths to individual vendors. 
Stall means a space of not more than eight by ten feet clearly defined by rails or other boundaries. 
(Code 2002, § 10-121; Ord. of 7-8-1985, § 32-215(1)) 
Sec. 10-20. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate a flea market without a city license. 
(b)  Fees. Annual license fees for operation of a flea market shall consist of: 
(1)  A base fee; and 
(2)  Additional fees per stall for all stalls available for use. 
Such fees shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Payment of fee. This license fee shall be paid annually or at such other time as the mayor and council may direct. 
(d)  Need for additional license. Any vendor who operates a stall in a flea market for 20 days out of a 28-day period of time shall be considered a regular business and not a vendor, and shall be required to obtain a regular separate business license from the city. 
(Code 2002, § 10-122; Ord. of 7-8-1985, § 32-215(2), (5)) 
Sec. 10-21. - Enclosed; fence and stall. 
All flea markets shall be conducted behind a privacy fence of a height not less than five feet which prohibits a view of the sale area. Each vendor operating as a part of the flea market shall operate within a stall. 
(Code 2002, § 10-123; Ord. of 7-8-1985, § 32-215(3)) 
Sec. 10-22. - Signs. 
No signs or other products shall be displayed on any street, right-of-way, sidewalk or other city property in connection with the operation of a flea market. 
(Code 2002, § 10-124; Ord. of 7-8-1985, § 32-215(4)) 
Secs. 10-23—10-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-48. - Right of inspection. 
The city, through its city clerk or the city police department, shall have the right to inspect the place of business and records of any licensee under this article during the hours authorized under this article for the conduct of business, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 10-201; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-12) 
Sec. 10-49. - Authority to train personnel. 
Any licensee under this article who has at least two years' practical experience in a regularly licensed massage or physical culture studio shall have the authority to train massage practitioners under their supervision at their place of business. 
(Code 2002, § 10-202; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-6) 
Sec. 10-50. - List of employees to be filed with city. 
It shall be the duty of all licensees under this article to file with the city, through its city clerk, the names of all employees, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment within ten days of employment. Any changes in information furnished shall be filed within ten days of the change. 
(Code 2002, § 10-203; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-7) 
Sec. 10-51. - Record of treatments to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records at the place of business of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person of the establishment administering such treatment. Records shall also be maintained as required under section 10-52. Such records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any city official. 
(Code 2002, § 10-204; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-8) 
Sec. 10-52. - Hours and place of operation. 
(a)  No massage shall be performed by any massage practitioner or any of his employees, apprentices or trainees as a part of conduct of business, in the home of any client or in any place except for the place of business of a licensee under this article, unless a written memorandum is first made in a log or record book kept at the place of business for the purpose of recording consecutively the date, time of treatment, place of treatment, name and address of person to receive treatment, type of treatment to be received, the name of the person to render treatment, and the time the practitioner leaves to render treatment. The practitioner shall record the time each treatment was completed immediately upon his return to the place of business. 
(b)  No business of a massage practitioner shall be located upon any realty unless it is zoned C-2 or I under the zoning chapter of the city. 
(c)  No business of a massage practitioner shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be at the time. 
(Code 2002, § 10-205; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-10) 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17. 
Sec. 10-53. - Prohibited contact. 
No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, apprentices or trainees shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs of any person. 
(Code 2002, § 10-206; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-11) 
Secs. 10-54—10-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-80. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business, trade or profession, or practice the business, trade or profession of a massage practitioner unless such person shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, obtain a license with the city through its city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 10-231; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-1) 
Sec. 10-81. - Massages by unlicensed persons. 
Massages may be given by persons not holding a license under this division only if such person is an apprentice or trainee of a license holder; only if such massages are given under the direct supervision of a licensee; and only if such licensee is present in the same room where the massage is being administered during the entire time during which the massage is given, and has an unobstructed view of both the person giving and receiving the massage. 
(Code 2002, § 10-232; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-9) 
Sec. 10-82. - Application contents. 
An application for the license required by this division shall be in writing and shall set forth or show compliance with the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a period of two years or longer in a massage therapy clinic. 
(3)  Qualifications, plainly stated, with all documentary exhibits annexed. 
(4)  Affidavit certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three qualified electors of the county. No such affidavit shall be required for renewals under this division. 
(5)  A copy of the diploma required under section 10-84(2) or affidavits proving facts required under section 10-84(3) must be attached. 
(Code 2002, § 10-233; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-1) 
Sec. 10-83. - Investigation. 
The city police department shall investigate the background and make a character reference check of applicant and each employee of the applicant prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Code 2002, § 10-234; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-2) 
Sec. 10-84. - Qualifications of applicant. 
An applicant, prior to making application for a license, must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  The applicant must be of good moral character. 
(2)  The applicant must be the holder of a diploma earned by the applicant from a school, representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six months, consisting of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects. 
(3)  If the applicant does not have such diploma, then the applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years in a regularly licensed massage therapy clinic in which the applicant has received training and experience in massage therapy, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management, and other subjects. 
(Code 2002, § 10-235; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-3) 
Sec. 10-85. - Issuance; fee; display. 
(a)  If such application is submitted in proper form and is approved by the mayor and council, then the city clerk shall issue a business license to such applicant for the calendar year during which it is issued upon the payment of an annual license fee, based on a calendar year from January 1 through December 31 of each year, in an amount to be set by resolution of the mayor and council from time to time. A schedule of fees shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Such license shall be prominently displayed in licensee's place of business so as to be capable of being viewed by clients and customers. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to sign an acknowledgement that he has received, read and understands the provisions of this division, prior to issuance of any license. 
(Code 2002, § 10-236; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-4) 
Sec. 10-86. - Transfers. 
No license shall be transferable. 
(Code 2002, § 10-237; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-13) 
Sec. 10-87. - Denial, suspension or revocation for cause; hearing. 
(a)  No application shall be denied except for due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section. No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any person shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing upon written notice to the licensee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice may be authorized by the mayor and council as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances justify. 
(b)  Due cause for the denial of an application or any renewal for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee is or has been guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being licensed to the practice of massage. 
(2)  An applicant or licensee has committed a deceptive business practice in that he sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the represented quality or quantity of goods or services or engages in any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of this state. 
(3)  An applicant or licensee has supplied false information to the city regardless of when the city may become aware of it. 
(4)  An applicant or licensee has made or makes any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication, oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the applicant or licensee has dealt or deals in pursuance of the licensed business. The term "misrepresentation of fact," as used in this subsection, shall embrace not only express misrepresentations, but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the licensee's conduct, including acts and omissions. 
(5)  The applicant or licensee is or has been engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name. 
(6)  The applicant or licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants so as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his professional duties. 
(7)  The applicant or licensee has violated any of the provisions of this division. 
(8)  The applicant or licensee has violated or is guilty of criminal attempt or conspiracy to violate any laws relating to racketeer-influenced and corrupt organizations as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 16-14-1 et seq.), crimes against the person as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 16-5-1 et seq.), sexual offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq.), gambling offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 12, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.), obscenity and related offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 12, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq.), or contributing to the delinquency of a minor, as now or hereafter defined by state law or has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude under the laws of this state or any other state or of the federal government. 
(9)  The original application, or its renewal, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(10)  There has been the occurrence of a fact that would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(11)  Failure of the applicant or licensee to have or maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license. 
(12)  The applicant or licensee is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage practitioner and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in such establishment except as may be allowed under this division. 
(13)  The premises in which the business is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants. 
(14)  Failure of the applicant or licensee to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. 
(c)  Any applicant or licensee who has his license application denied or revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation. 
(d)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The mayor shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the licensee. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence that is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence under oath in support of the charges; the licensee shall then present his evidence under oath. The evidence of each party may be supported by the submission of pertinent documents. The mayor and council will allow each party to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and the city may be represented by counsel and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. In addition, the mayor and council may interrogate both parties and all witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(Code 2002, § 10-238; Ord. of 5-14-2001(1), § 10-6-5) 
Secs. 10-88—10-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MEDIA PRODUCTIONS 

Sec. 10-118. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the public policy of the state to market the state as a location for media productions, recognizing the economic impact this industry provides, as well as the tourism it generates for local jurisdictions such as the city, which is fortunate to have a diverse number of unique locations to attract movies and television productions to the city. 
(b)  Despite the many positive benefits a media production may offer, certain inconveniences may result if the production company and city cannot work in concert to ensure minimum standards are met and to ensure a thoroughly planned production schedule is followed. Such concerns are best addressed through a regulatory permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-301) 
Sec. 10-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
High-impact activities means those activities having an intended duration of 15 or more consecutive days and/or activities that will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft, stunts, and similar activities are considered high-impact activities. High-impact activities are activities that always take place at a location that is outside the boundaries of a permanent filming location. 
Low-impact activities means those activities having an intended duration of no more than 14 consecutive days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Low-impact activities are activities that always take place at a location that is outside the boundaries of a permanent filming location. 
Permanent filming activities means those activities that are on-going and occur at a fixed location intended primarily for such purposes and usually using facilities and structures that are permanent or intended to remain in place for an indefinite period of time. These facilities and structures may include, but are not limited to, components of film production such as studios, sound stages, production laboratories, equipment storage areas, fabrication shops, office, accompanying food services, and permanent working sets. Permanent filming locations must contain a minimum of 235 acres. If any residence is less than 1,000 feet from the filming activity, the notice requirement found in section 10-124(d) shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-302) 
Sec. 10-120. - Scope of coverage. 
The permit required by this article shall be required for all movies, television, or video series, pilots, feature films and documentaries, commercials, music videos, photo shoots, infomercials and public service announcements, whether the final product is intended for commercial use or not, unless the activity shall wholly occur on private property within an otherwise licensed facility (such as a film or television studio). Any media production on public property intended to be closed to participation by the public, or restricting access to public property or facilities normally accessible by the public, shall require a permit. For purposes of this article, media production activity shall include areas designated for parking of trucks and equipment on public or private property, base camps used during the production activity, and food service areas. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-303) 
Sec. 10-121. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit allowed with conditions in all zoning districts. Whenever a permit is sought for activities in primarily residential neighborhoods, extra consideration shall be given to the conditions imposed to ameliorate as much as possible inconvenience to the residents. 
(b)  General standards. Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the zoning administrator and director of public safety, or their designees, to review locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. A copy of the script shall be made available, upon request, to allow the city staff to better understand the applicant's needs. The following general standards shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  No tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection, or food service facilities shall be located within 100 feet of the property line of any property used for residential use, unless the owner or tenant gives written consent; 
(2)  Buildings, depending on square footage, and other temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the city; any food preparation of food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the city health department, or evidence of exemption; 
(3)  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic; 
(4)  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the zoning administrator or his designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned upon restoration of permanent signage following completion of the media activity; 
(5)  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed without the prior written consent of the chief of police; 
(6)  No modification to any existing traffic signage, streetlight, traffic control device or other officially installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior consent of the chief of police; 
(7)  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible; 
(8)  No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the city, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity; 
(9)  Traffic management plan. The applicant shall submit to the chief of police a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur, even if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted. Detours shall be determined and approved by the chief of police and temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; the public works director shall also review and approve such plan; 
(10)  The city shall be listed in the production credits for all permits acquired. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-304) 
Sec. 10-122. - Low-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a low-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and the nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)  Low-impact activity permits may be extended by the zoning administrator, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the city. Application shall be made no less than two to five business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while production activity is occurring and shown to city inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  No street closure, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall occur, including use of on-street parking spaces or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-305) 
Sec. 10-123. - High-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media production and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects: 
(1)  The duration of a high-impact activity permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended by the zoning administrator, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the city. Application shall be made no less than two to five business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, in location, at all times while activity is occurring and shown to city inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum; any activity occurring outside of the above hours involving planned noises in excess of 65dB at a distance of 100 feet from the point of origin shall be addressed in the application. If activity is planned within 500 feet of a residential area outside the hours specified, or will involve noises in excess of 65dB, notice shall be given by the best means available to residents as far in advance as reasonable. 
(3)  Street closures, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  The city will not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. 
(5)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this article. 
(6)  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the location, the chief of police may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: pyrotechnics, demolition, discharge of firearms or other weapons, motor vehicle chases, physical stunts, and similar actions. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-306) 
Sec. 10-124. - Application and permit procedure. 
(a)  Applications. All applications shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city. No application shall be deemed accepted unless accompanied by payment of the requisite application fee in U.S. funds. 
(b)  Every application shall state the name and contact information of a responsible representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times during actual production activity within the city; more than one point of contact may be specified. 
(c)  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps or plats to illustrate locations, property boundaries, existing material improvements, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(d)  When activity is to occur in or near residential areas, personal notice of intent to secure a permit and the place, date and time of the proposed media activity shall be provided by the applicant, within five days of filing the application; to the extent feasible, written acknowledgment of the notice shall be obtained from the resident or resident's agent. For purposes of this section, all residential properties with a residence and within 100 feet of the outside boundaries of the locations where production activity is to occur should be notified. 
(e)  A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The minimum limits of general liability insurance coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(f)  All applications shall be filed with the city clerk, or clerk designee, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the city. 
(g)  Permits. All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the city clerk, or clerk designee, in writing. If approved, the city shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. Low-impact activity applications shall be approved or disapproved within two to five business days of a complete application and high-impact activity applications shall be approved or disapproved within two to five business days of a complete application. If the application is denied, the city clerk, or clerk designee, shall state, in writing the reason for denial. An aggrieved applicant may appeal to the city council at the next regular meeting occurring more than five days following receipt of a written denial. 
(h)  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the city under other provisions of this Code. 
(i)  Any material variation from the approved scope of work permitted shall be grounds for permit revocation, unless the permit is modified in advance by the permittee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-307) 
Sec. 10-125. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)  Application fees for low-impact activity permits shall be $100.00 and the application fee for a high-impact activity permit shall be $250.00. Application fees are nonrefundable and must be paid in full at time of application. 
(b)  Daily permit fees of $100.00 for each calendar day on which production activity physically occurs within the city shall be paid upon the last day of scheduled activity; if a production is scheduled for a duration in excess of a calendar month, the accrued daily fee shall be due and payable on the last day of each month in which production activity occurred. 
(c)  Additional fees and charges may be assessed based upon specific requirements, including fees for the monitoring of public safety or special services by a city department, based upon labor, time and equipment necessary to provide the service. When using city-owned buildings or property other than public road rights-of-way, for production activities, a separate rental fee or charge may be negotiated. 
(d)  Application fees and daily permit fees for use of city services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or nonprofit organizations holding 501(c) status from the IRS, or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the city, which may delay permit issuance. 
(e)  Reduction or waiver of daily permit fees may be approved by the city council for commercial productions providing a greater than normal economic benefit to the community, as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-308) 
Sec. 10-126. - Liaison. 
The city council is hereby expressly authorized to designate an employee as the city's media production liaison to work with and be the city's point of contact with media productions, to assist in coordinating the permitting process for the city, and to promote the city as a "camera-ready community" under a program with the state office of film, music and digital entertainment. In making such designation, the city council shall define the duties, compensation, and benefits of such employee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-309) 
Sec. 10-127. - Violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 10-310) 
Secs. 10-128—10-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means engaging in a purposeful activity, trade, profession or occupation for gain or profit. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation, or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, an IRS form W-2, but not an IRS form 1099. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location, which is the site of personal property, which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property, which is rented or leased to another, does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue purposes. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions means: 
(1)  Lawyers. 
(2)  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.). 
(4)  Chiropractors. 
(5)  Podiatrists. 
(6)  Dentists. 
(7)  Optometrists. 
(8)  Psychologists. 
(9)  Veterinarians. 
(10)  Landscape architects. 
(11)  Land surveyors. 
(12)  Physiotherapists. 
(13)  Public accountants. 
(14)  Embalmers. 
(15)  Funeral directors. 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers. 
(17)  Architects. 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors. 
The term "practitioners of professions" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 10-31; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-37) 
Sec. 10-154. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or, in the case of an out-of-state business, with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the tax collecting official or his deputies or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(Code 2002, § 10-32; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-36) 
State Law reference— Levy of tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 10-155. - Administrative fee; regulatory fee. 
(a)  An annual nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee, as established from time to time by the mayor and council, is required on all occupation tax accounts for the handling and processing of the occupation tax. Payment of the administrative fee shall be due and payable at the time an occupation tax is paid. 
(b)  A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee levied in this article is an exercise of the police power of the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Code 2002, § 10-33; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-38) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8, 48-13-9; administrative fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(e). 
Sec. 10-156. - Levied. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations within the corporate limits of the city and pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state persons with no location or office in the state, based upon the business classification and the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Business classifications and taxes shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. For taxpayers commencing business on or after April 1 of any year, the rate of tax shall be three-fourths the rate for the full calendar year. For taxpayers commencing business on or after July 1 of any year, the rate of tax shall be one-half the rate for the full calendar year. For taxpayers commencing business on or after October 1 of any year, the rate of tax shall be one-fourth the rate for the full calendar year. 
(c)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location within the city, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. A fixed location is a location or office as defined by section 10-153 and that area within five feet of the perimeter of the fixed location. 
(d)  Persons with no physical location either in the city or state, but which perform services or sell products within the corporate limits of the city, shall be subject to the administrative fee and occupation tax if such person has more than nominal business activity within the city, including: 
(1)  One or more employees who exert effort within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns real or personal property which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generates business income or is used to generate business income. 
(e)  On or before December 1 of each year, the city clerk shall mail to each registered business or practitioner of a profession or occupation subject to the tax a business registration and return form for the following calendar year. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return, under oath, by January 31 in every year the tax is due, stating the location of the business and the number of employees upon which the tax is calculated. It shall not constitute a defense to the payment of the tax levied under this article that a person failed to receive a tax return form from the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 10-34; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-39; Ord. of 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 10-157. - Limitations. 
(a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person. A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in the state and who does not have a location or office within the city, but who is subject to occupation tax by virtue of more than nominal business activity within the city, shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax to at least one other state local government. A person who has a location or office within this city and one or more locations or offices in other taxing jurisdictions within the state shall be taxed only on the number of employees within the city. 
(b)  Persons from out of state with no office or location in the state subject to an occupation tax under this article shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in the state. Such local government shall be the government of the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or the person performs services. Such persons submitting documentation to the city showing payment of such tax to another local government in the state shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(c)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. No additional license, occupation, or professional tax shall be levied or collected from the broker's affiliated associate brokers and salespersons. 
(Code 2002, § 10-35; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-40) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on occupational licenses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13 et seq. 
Sec. 10-158. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied upon the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by, and who is employed in practice exclusively by, the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States or the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Not-for-profit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cotton seed or cotton seed meal or hills in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the sale, when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Insurance companies pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; 
(10)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(11)  Any state or local authority or not-for-profit organization; or 
(12)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
(Code 2002, § 10-36; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-44) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on occupational license, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13 et seq. 
Sec. 10-159. - Registration of businesses. 
(a)  Before conducting any business or practicing any profession or occupation within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be the duty of each person engaging in a business, trade, profession or occupation, to register with the city clerk on forms provided for that purpose. The registration by each person shall state the location or office address from which business is conducted; identify the dominant line of business, profession or occupation conducted; state the number of employees; and identify, by name, address and other pertinent information requested, the form of business organization and its ownership. If the person claims entitlement to exemption from the tax, the basis for such exemption shall be stated on the registration form. Registration forms shall be signed, under oath, and dated, by an owner, partner or officer of the business. 
(b)  Registrations shall be renewed annually, between January 1 and April 1 for the current year. Upon any change in the ownership of a registered business organization, notification of such change in ownership shall be reported, in writing, to the city clerk within ten business days on forms provided for this purpose. 
(c)  It is not the intent of the city to require registration as a means of regulating any business, trade, profession or occupation, but solely as a means for acquiring information on those businesses and professions operating within the city for purposes of determining liability for payment of the occupation tax. No fee shall be imposed for filing a registration statement or for ascertaining whether such business or practitioner has paid an occupation tax to another local government. 
(Code 2002, § 10-37; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-41) 
Sec. 10-160. - Due dates: delinquency. 
(a)  Each administrative fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee and occupation tax shall be payable January 31 of each year, and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. Any amounts owed which are not paid by April 1 shall be subject to the penalties for delinquency as described in the article. For any new profession, occupation or business begun in the city after January 31 of any year, the administrative fee and occupation tax shall be due and payable immediately upon beginning business and, if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall be delinquent. The city clerk shall issue an occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation or business has paid the fees and taxes owed. Unless otherwise exempted by federal or state law, or this article, any person practicing a profession, occupation or business in this city without having valid certificates issued to him shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 10-166. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies of subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 2002, § 10-38; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-42; Ord. of 5-13-2002) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of fee or tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20. 
Sec. 10-161. - Certificate. 
Every person subject to payment of the occupation tax imposed by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown upon request to any officer of the city charged with enforcing this article. 
(Code 2002, § 10-39; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-43) 
Sec. 10-162. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of occupation tax levied pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure. Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 10-40; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-45) 
Sec. 10-163. - Evidence of state registration; other qualifications. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure at the time of registering the business in accordance with section 10-159. 
(b)  Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(c)  Any person required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business with state or federal regulatory authorities shall do so before the city registration is issued. 
(Code 2002, § 10-41; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-46) 
Sec. 10-164. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax required in this article shall be required to register the business as prescribed in this article. When in default, the officer or agents soliciting for or obtaining business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Each person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration as provided in this section before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 2002, § 10-42; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-47) 
Sec. 10-165. - Civil penalty and interest. 
A penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation which or who fails to apply for and obtain appropriate registration, and to pay any and all administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this article by April 1 of each year. Such penalty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the administrative fee and occupation tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent for each month or partial month of such delinquency. Penalties provided in this section shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(Code 2002, § 10-43; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-48; Ord. of 5-13-2002) 
Sec. 10-166. - Inspection of records. 
The city, through its employees, officers or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records for inspection within 30 days of an official written request shall be grounds for petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction for a subpoena requiring the production of such books and records. It is the duty of all persons subject to this article to keep and maintain adequate business records at the location or office of the business in this city and to make such records available in the city for examination by designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and additional interest of one and one-half percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Code 2002, § 10-44; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-50) 
Sec. 10-167. - Notice to persons subject to tax. 
Notices given to holders of occupation tax certificates under this article shall be deemed sufficient if served by certified mail, addressed to the owners of the business at the address as shown in the business registration as filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 10-45; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-51) 
Sec. 10-168. - Executions; liens. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of the tax against the person liable for the tax, including interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for the tax as provided by this article, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the property of the person liable for the tax, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for goods sold or services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 2002, § 10-46; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-52) 
State Law reference— Issuance of executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. 
Sec. 10-169. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions of such ordinances, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2002, § 10-47; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-53) 
Sec. 10-170. - Public hearing before future tax increases. 
Prior to final action on any future amendment to this article, subsequent to January 1, 2000, which increases the rate of, or changes the criterion basis for, the occupation tax as set forth in this article, the mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing. In any year when revenue from the occupation tax generated by this article is greater than revenue from occupation tax for the preceding year, the mayor and council shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Code 2002, § 10-48; Ord. of 1-10-2000(2), § 19-54) 
State Law reference— Public hearing required, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Secs. 10-171—10-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 10-194. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnshop means any location where a pawnbroker engages in business. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 (Pawnbrokers; definitions), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this article. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this article, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130. 
(Code 2002, § 10-161; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-2) 
Sec. 10-195. - State laws adopted. 
The laws relative to pawnbrokers found in O.C.G.A. title 44, ch. 12, art. 3, pt. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.) are hereby adopted and incorporated into this article as if they were fully set forth in this section. 
(Code 2002, § 10-162; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-1) 
Sec. 10-196. - Hours of operation. 
Pawnshops may not be open for business: 
(1)  After 6:00 p.m. nor before 8:00 a.m. from Monday through Thursday; 
(2)  After 6:30 p.m. nor before 8:00 a.m. on Fridays; 
(3)  After 8:00 p.m. nor before 8:00 a.m. on Saturday; or 
(4)  On Sunday at all. 
(Code 2002, § 10-163; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-3) 
Sec. 10-197. - Inspection. 
All pawnshops shall be open at all times for inspection by law enforcement personnel who may search for missing or stolen personal property without a search warrant and who may inspect all pledged goods. 
(Code 2002, § 10-164; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-4) 
Sec. 10-198. - Reports. 
All pawnbrokers shall report on a weekly basis such information kept under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 as may be required by the chief of police. Such reports shall be on forms provided by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 10-165; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-5) 
Sec. 10-199. - Minimum time of pawn. 
All pledged goods must be kept for a minimum of ten days before being sold, or otherwise disposed of by transfer, shipment, or otherwise. 
(Code 2002, § 10-166; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-6) 
Sec. 10-200. - Security requirements. 
In addition to the normal zoning restrictions, any building or structure used for a pawnshop shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Interior lighting of not less than 75 footcandles per square foot; 
(2)  Exterior lighting on all exposed sides of the building or structure equal to not less than 100 footcandles per side at a distance of not more than ten feet from the side of the structure; 
(3)  Deadbolt locks on all doors; 
(4)  Burglar bars on all windows; 
(5)  Fire alarm system as recommended by the state fire marshal; 
(6)  Burglar alarm system to notify the county sheriff's office, burglar alarm company, and owner; and 
(7)  Video camera surveillance of customers' purchases. 
(Code 2002, § 10-167; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-7) 
Sec. 10-201. - Special restrictions. 
No pawnshop shall be located within 1,000 feet of a school or church, as measured from property line to property line. 
(Code 2002, § 10-168; Ord. of 3-9-1998, § 6-9-8) 
Sec. 10-202. - Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry, and precious stones within the unincorporated areas of the city is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and Social Security Number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
Sec. 10-203. - Permit prerequisite to issuance of occupation tax certificate. 
No occupation tax certificate as required by this article shall be granted to any person until a permit card for the employees and/or manager and a license for the business as required by this article have been issued or approved by the city police department. 
Secs. 10-204—10-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTERS 

Sec. 10-230. - Findings; definitions; premises prohibited. 
(a)  The mayor and council make the following findings: 
(1)  The operation of a sexual encounter center for purposes of providing the opportunity to engage in, or the opportunity to view, live sex acts is declared to be a disorderly house and a public nuisance per se which should be prohibited; and 
(2)  The operation of a sexual encounter center contributes to the spread of sexually transmitted diseases; and 
(3)  The operation of a sexual encounter center is inimical to the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the inhabitants of the city; 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the payment of money or the exchange of any item of value for: 
(1)  The right to enter the premises, or any portion thereof; 
(2)  The right to remain on the premises, or any portion thereof; 
(3)  The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or to remain on, the premises, or any portion thereof; or 
(4)  The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or remain on, the premises, or any portion thereof. 
Live sex act means any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual intercourse. 
Operate and maintain means to organize, design, perpetuate or control. The term "operate and maintain" includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent, maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise. 
Oral sexual contact means oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus. 
Sexual encounter center means any business or premises in which one or more persons may view, or participate in, a live sex act for consideration. 
Sexual intercourse means penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or vulva. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a sexual encounter center. 
(d)  Operation of a sexual encounter center is a public nuisance per se which may be abated by order of the municipal court. 
(e)  The city attorney, in the name of the city, may apply to the municipal court for an order permitting the city to abate violations of this section. 
(f)  After notice to the operator of a sexual encounter center, the municipal judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a sexual encounter center is being operated in violation of this section. 
(g)  If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal judge determines that a sexual encounter center is being operated in the city in violation of this section, an order shall be entered authorizing the city to abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the operator of the sexual encounter center and mailed to the owner of the property upon which the sexual encounter center is located. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the non-obscene presentation, showing or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education, or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2(10-290), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-231—10-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment, maintenance, or use of building, structure, or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; prohibited conduct, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-254. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of such businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such businesses. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  This article is not intended to interfere with or suppress legitimate expression or any speech activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States constitution nor is it intended to license any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-250), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-255. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides to the public one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose: 
(1)  Offers or provides books, magazines, films, videotapes, compact disks, video disks, or software (whether for viewing off-premises or on-premises by use of motion picture machines, televisions, monitors, computers or other image producing device), periodicals, or other printed or pictorial materials which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Offers or provides instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for stimulation of human genital organs, for sadomasochistic use or abuse, or for use in conjunction with the term "specified sexual activities," excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
Adult cabaret means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides live entertainment intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult encounter parlor means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides a premises where customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the presence of such customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult modeling studio means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides to customers of live models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
Adult movie theater means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides the exhibition to customers of motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult service means a dance, performance or other activity, including, but not limited to, service of food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, or listening conducted for any consideration in an adult service business by a person who exposes one or more specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service. 
Adult service business means a commercial establishment where any adult service is provided to patrons in the regular course of business and as one of the substantial business purposes of the establishment. 
Adult service provider means any person who provides an adult service, or a bathhouse technician. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Adult video facility means a commercial establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides films, motion pictures, videocassette projections, slides, photographs or other visual media characterized by depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are shown in the regular course of business. The term "adult video facility" does not include a theater where all viewing occurs in a common area with seating for 50 or more persons. 
Applicant. The applicant for a license shall be the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. 
Bath means any method of washing or cleansing the human body or any external part thereof with water or other liquid, vapor or steam, including, but not limited to, steam rooms, cabinet baths, sauna baths, sitz baths, colon irrigations, showers and baths of all kinds. 
Bathhouse means any establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides administered baths or where any person engages in any or all of the activities mentioned in the definition of bath, provided that nothing in this section contained shall be construed to include a duly licensed hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, physician, surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath, podiatrist, or person holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the state. Furthermore, the term "bathhouse" excludes from its operation establishments wherein duly licensed barbers and cosmetologists administer baths only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
Bath technician means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, administers a bath to another person at a bathhouse. 
Conduct any business in a sexually oriented business. Any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business in a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the sexually oriented business premises where cash funds, records of credit cards, or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or the activities conducted therein, are kept; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the sexually oriented business premises. 
Code enforcement officer means the person appointed as the person responsible for enforcing city codes. 
Customer means any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of, and on the premises of, a sexually oriented business operating as a private club. 
Employee means any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business, whether as an independent contractor or otherwise, or who works in or about a sexually oriented business and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the sexually oriented business or from the customers therein. 
Entertainment means any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors, or customers. The term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses, or other employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers. 
Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its substantial business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Exterior portion means any part of the physical structure of a sexually oriented business, including a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering, or window, which is visible from any public way or public property. 
Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Manager means any person who supervises, directs or manages any employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person who conducts any business in a sexually oriented business with respect to any activity conducted on the premises of the sexually oriented business, including any on-site manager. 
Massage parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity means The term "massage parlor" shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program. 
Multifamily tract means any residential tract that contains any building or buildings or portion or thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased, sold, let out or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied, in separate units, each containing living, sleeping and food preparation facilities, as the homes or residences of three or more families, groups, or individuals living independently of each other. 
Nudity and state of nudity means a state of dress which fails to opaquely or fully cover the cleft of the human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or the portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
On-site manager means a person charged by an owner of operator of a sexually oriented business with the responsibility for direct supervision of the operation of the sexually oriented business and with monitoring and observing all areas of the sexually oriented business to which customers are admitted at all times during which the sexually oriented business if open for business or customers are on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually oriented business. 
Owner means the proprietor if a sole proprietorship; all general partners if a partnership; or all officers, directors and persons holding 20 percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation; or all members if a limited liability company. 
Permit means a current, valid permit issued by the city pursuant to the terms of this article to an operator of a sexually oriented business, to an adult service provider, manager, operator or other adult serve employee. 
Police chief means the police chief of the city or his designated representative. 
Public park means a publicly owned or leased tract of land, whether situated in the city or not, designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained and operated for use by the general public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes by the city or any political subdivision of the state and containing improvement and pathways, access or facilities intended for public recreational use. The term "public park" shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, traffic circles, or easements. 
Residential means pertaining to the use of land, whether situated within the city or not, for premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. A premises which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. Hotels, motels, nursing homes and nursery schools shall not be considered to be residential. The term "residential" shall also include any unimproved tract zoned for residential uses by the zoning ordinances of the city, and any unimproved tract zoned for residential uses. 
Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building, whether located within the city or not, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and related religious activities or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
School means a building, whether situated within the city or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadiums and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" is limited to: 
(1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2)  Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Separate area means any portion of the interior of a sexually oriented business separated from any other portion of a sexually oriented business by any wall, partition or other divider. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult encounter parlor, adult lounge, adult modeling studio, adult movie theater, adult theater, massage parlor, escort agency or any establishment which has a substantial business purpose of offering a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating, to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "sexually oriented business" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing state licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licenses cosmetologists, or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the state licenses held; 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing state licensed physicians or state licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
(3)  Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers. 
Sign means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and that is used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at such sexually oriented business. The term "sign" shall also include such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business as well as such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any part of the tract upon which such a sexually oriented business is situated. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Anus or cleft of the buttocks. Attire that is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, thongs and any other similar garment that does not completely and opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks; 
c.  The portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, flagellation, bestiality, fondling, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
Substantial business purpose means a business within the city in which an adult service and/or a sexually oriented business constitutes 25 percent or more of the business: 
(1)  Floor area; 
(2)  Inventory; 
(3)  Gross sales; or 
(4)  Employee full-time equivalents. 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership, whether situated within the city or not. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means a transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business includes: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-251), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-256. - Construction of definitions. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in these regulations or in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-252), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-257—10-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND LICENSE 

Sec. 10-273. - Administration. 
(a)  The administration of this article is vested in the city code enforcement officer and police chief, except as otherwise specifically provided, as follows: 
(1)  The police chief shall make police department facilities and personnel available to fingerprint and photograph an applicant for a license. The cost of fingerprinting and photographing shall be paid by the applicant at the time the service is provided. Records of fingerprints and photographs so obtained shall be maintained at the police department in the normal course of business. 
(2)  The police chief shall have a criminal history inquiry conducted on all persons listed as applicants in a license application. The inquiry shall be limited to determining whether an applicant for a license has a criminal conviction of the type described and for the period indicated in section 10-276. The police chief shall notify the mayor in the event such criminal conviction is found to exist. 
(3)  The city code enforcement officer shall notify the mayor whether an applicant or designated license holder in a license application has failed to comply with or is in violation of applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances, or the building codes, development standards or other land use ordinances and regulations of the city relating to the business to be operated under the license. 
(4)  Nothing herein is intended to prohibit or restrict the police chief or the city code enforcement officer from providing additional assistance as may derive from their normal duties and responsibilities or as may be requested by the mayor. In no event shall any assistance as described herein or the absence of such assistance, delay or extend the time period specified in section 10-278 for the mayor to act on a license application. 
(b)  An application for a license, or for the renewal of a license, made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the mayor, who shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this article. The mayor shall also suspend or revoke a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in and for which it is issued and may be renewed annually. 
(d)  A license, if granted, shall state on its face: 
(1)  The name of the license holder; 
(2)  The name and address of the licensed premises; 
(3)  The date of issuance of the license; 
(4)  The particular classification or classifications of sexually oriented business for which the license is granted; and 
(5)  The license number. 
(e)  The license of the sexually oriented business shall be classified as follows, based upon the information in the application and subject to subsequent inspection for verification: 
(1)  Adult arcade; 
(2)  Adult bookstore; 
(3)  Adult cabaret; 
(4)  Adult encounter parlor; 
(5)  Adult modeling studio; 
(6)  Adult movie theater; 
(7)  Adult video facility; 
(8)  Bathhouse; 
(9)  Escort agency; or 
(10)  Massage parlor. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-253), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-274. - Sexually oriented business license: purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this article to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-254), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-275. - Sexually oriented business license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued pursuant to this article for the particular classification of a sexually oriented business sought to be operated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business in an establishment that is licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages under chapter 4. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business under any name or designation, or under any premises name or designation, or at any premises address not specified in a valid license issued pursuant to this article. Each additional premises sought to be operated as a sexually oriented business shall require a separate license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a sexually oriented business to hire or engage any provider, employee or manager who does not hold a valid license as required under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any business in a sexually oriented business located within the city unless the license is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the sexually oriented business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises. 
(f)  In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed that there was no license at the time of the alleged offense, unless a license was than posted as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-255), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-276. - Application for sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  A person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business shall make application for a license in person at the office of the mayor. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the mayor and obtainable from the city clerk. The application shall be signed under oath by each individual listed as an applicant and notarized. An application shall be deemed filed with the city when the mayor has received the required fee in full, a completed application with all information required in subsection (c) of this section, and the photograph and fingerprints of each applicant. The application shall be in duplicate including all addendum or attachments thereto, with one copy being kept on file with the city clerk's office and one copy being transmitted to the police chief. 
(b)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, that individual must be listed in the application for the license as the applicant and also as the designated license holder. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is a legal entity other than an individual, each officer, manager or general partner of the entity, and any other individual who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business, must be listed in the application as an applicant, with the individual appearing in person to make application being further designated as the primary applicant with general authority to act on behalf of the entity in connection with the application, and the entity listed as the designated license holder. Each applicant shall provide his photograph and fingerprints as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to such other information as may be requested on the face of the application form, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, premises address, business mailing address if different for the premises address, and phone number of the proposed business. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the designated license holder. 
(3)  Where the person seeking to operate the business is something other than an individual, the entity's state of origination and date of formation. 
(4)  The name under which the business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. 
(5)  The address, plat and/or legal description of the tract of land on which the business is to be located. 
(6)  If the sexually oriented business is in operation, the date on which the owner acquired the business for which the license is sought, and the date on which the business began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the license is sought. 
(7)  If the business is not in operation, the expected start-up date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the license.) If the expected start-up date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same. 
(8)  Each applicant's full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five years. 
(9)  Each applicant's current residential mailing address and telephone number. This information shall be forwarded in writing to the city clerk by letter postmarked no later than ten days after any change in this information. 
(10)  Written proof of each applicant's age, in the form of either a current driver's license with picture or other picture identification issued by an appropriate governmental agency. 
(11)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective date of any license or licenses relating to the operation of a sexually oriented business or relating to the provision of any adult services which is held or has been held at any time by an applicant or by the designated license holder, whether any such license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason or reasons therefor. 
(12)  Any specified criminal act committed by the applicant or the intended license holder for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the city or the state, would constitute a specific act under this section; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the city or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offences occurring within any 24-month period for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the city or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
d.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the requirements of this subsection. 
(13)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(14)  The name of the business manager who will have actual supervisory authority over the operation of the business. This information shall be forwarded in writing to the city clerk by letter postmarked not later than ten days after any change in this information. 
(15)  An accurate, to-scale, floor plan or diagram of the business premises clearly showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted, the location of all managers' stations and overhead lighting fixtures, and clearly designating all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment in full of the fee required in section 10-277. 
(2)  Current photograph and the fingerprints of each applicant. Fingerprints shall be taken at the police department, or by any other law enforcement agency if accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency. 
(3)  A certified copy of the trade name certificate filed in compliance with the trade name statute of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, if the business is to be operated under an assumed name. 
(4)  If the business is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto. 
(5)  If the business is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments thereto. 
(6)  If the business is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of state. 
(7)  If the business is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of state. 
(8)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the business is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed. 
(9)  If the person identified as the fee owner of the tract of land in subsection (d)(8) of this section are not also the owners of the business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the business have or shall obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the operation of the business. 
(10)  Any of subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished to the mayor with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(e)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(f)  A separate application and license shall be required for each sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-256), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-277. - Fees. 
Every application for issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a non-prorated and non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-257), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-278. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Within 45 days after the application for a sexually oriented business license is filed with the city, the mayor shall mail to the designated license holder a license or a written notice of intent to deny. 
(b)  The mayor shall issue a license to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,500 feet of any school, religious institution, public park, licensed day care center, or property used or zoned for residential purposes. Measurements shall be made by a registered land surveyor in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's business to the nearest point on the property line of such school, religious institution, public park, licensed day care center, or property zoned for residential purposes. 
(2)  The applicant's business is located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business for which there is a license under this article. Measurements shall be made by a registered land surveyor in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's business to the nearest point on the property line of any other such business. 
(3)  The applicant's business is located in a section of the city that is zoned other than I (industrial). 
(4)  The applicant holds a license, issued under chapter 4, to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the intended sexually oriented business. 
(5)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application. 
(6)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application. 
(7)  The applicant, or the intended license holder, has been convicted of a specified criminal act, as described in section 10-276(c)(12). 
(8)  The applicant's business is not in compliance with sections 10-330 and 10-331. (The mayor may allow any noncompliance with sections 10-330 and 10-331 to be cured during the mayor's review period established in subsection (a) of this section, provided that it must be cured before the notice of decision on the license is issued.) 
(9)  The application or the business does not meet any other requirement of this article. 
(10)  The operator has had a license revoked for the same business within the 12-month period next preceding the date that the application was filed. The fact that a revocation is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(11)  The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the business owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the business will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same. 
(12)  The applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assess against or imposed upon the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder in relation to a sexually oriented business or arising out of any other business activity owned or operated by the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder and licensed by the city. 
(13)  The applicant or the designated license holder has failed to comply with or is in violation of applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances or the building codes, development standards or other land use ordinances and regulations of the city or county relating to the business or activity to be conducted under the license. 
(14)  Within the past two years, the applicant or the designated license holder has had a license similar to that authorized under this article, but issued in another jurisdiction, revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a license issued under this article if committed in the city. The fact that the revocation is being appealed at the time of the decision on this application shall have no effect. 
(15)  The granting of a license would violate a state or federal statute, county ordinance, or a court order. 
(c)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal application is timely filed as provided in section 10-280, the property uses and measurements for the renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the original application for the business was filed. If not timely filed, renewal applications shall be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all respects as original applications. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-258), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-279. - Appeal from denial of license. 
(a)  In the event that the mayor determines that an applicant is not eligible for a license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of its application by the mayor, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with section 10-331. An applicant may appeal the decision of the mayor regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the city council within ten days after applicant has given notice of such denial. The mayor's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the mayor's decision on the issuance of a license. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted before the city council and after reasonable notice to the applicant. At the hearing, the council shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under procedures established by the council, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(b)  The city council shall conduct the hearing within 30 days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The council shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  In any instance in which the applicant's establishment is to be situated within 1,000 feet, as measured hereunder, from another proposed establishment for which a previously filed license application under this article has been denied, and the previously filed application is still subject to appeals, the mayor may grant the license on a conditional basis, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application. A license so issued may be withdrawn and denied effective upon the third day after notice thereof is given to the operator following the resolution of the appeals on the prior license. In case of denial, the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal hereunder as if the license had been denied in the first instance. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (c) of this section shall not be construed to prohibit a sexually oriented business for which there is a license from relocating to another location situated within 1,000 feet of its existing location, provided that the proposed location complies with all applicable requirements of this article other than its proximity to its own existing business location. An original license application shall be required to be filed for the proposed relocation, and the mayor shall conditionally grant the application, on the stipulation that the license will not actually be issued until the applicant discontinues operation at its existing location and surrenders the license for its existing location. Any such relocation must be completed within 180 days from the date that the license is conditionally granted or the conditional grant of the application will become void. Pending the removal of the business to its new location, both the old and new locations shall be deemed to be operation under a license for the purpose of measurements to locations of other proposed sexually oriented business for which applications may be filed. 
(e)  In any instance in which the proposed business tract description submitted by an applicant reflects a tract or parcel of land that has resulted from a subdivision of property for which compliance with the applicable subdivision requirements of this article was required, and the mayor determines that the property has not been lawfully subdivided in accordance with the proper subdivision requirements, then the mayor shall cause all measurements and determinations regarding the issuance of the license to be made on the basis of the tract from which the subdivision was made, rather than the subdivided tract. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-259), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-280. - Non-transferability of license. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this article are not transferable as to licensee or location. A licensee shall not conduct a different classification of a sexually oriented business than that designated in the license or conduct a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted under any name or under any designation or classification not specified in the license for that business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a license. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-260), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-281—10-291. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 10-292. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an adult service provider or a sexually oriented business manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and owner to ensure that no person acts as an adult service provider or manager of or in the business unless that person holds a permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-267), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-293. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall make application to the mayor in person. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by the mayor and shall include: 
(1)  The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(5)  A list of any specified criminal acts, and time of service in jail or prison, as specified in section 10-276(c)(12); and 
(6)  Two passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified by the mayor, which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable processing of $30.00. Each applicant shall be required to provide fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the police chief to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports from the state department of public safety or any other appropriate state or federal government entity. 
(c)  The mayor shall issue the permit within ten days from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the applicant has been convicted of or spent time in jail or prison for an offense specified in the applicable provisions of section 10-276(c)(12) within the time specified therein. If the application is not granted, then the applicant shall be mailed notice of the grounds and of their right to provide evidence and request a hearing as provided below, within ten days from the date of filing of the application. 
(d)  Each permit issued by the mayor shall consist of two photographic identification cards; a personal card and an on-site card. 
(e)  Any applicant whose application is denied and who requests a hearing on the denial shall be granted a hearing within ten days following the receipt of the written request by the mayor. The hearing shall be conducted as provided in section 10-279. 
(f)  If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the mayor and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $10.00 within three days following verification of the identity of the holder. 
(g)  No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not provide proof that he is at least 18 years of age. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person under age 18 shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-268), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-294. - Term; transfer; amendment. 
(a)  A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify the police chief of his new address within ten days following any change of his address. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-269), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-295. - Display. 
(a)  Each manager or adult service provider shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times while acting as an adult service provider or manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  Each adult service provider shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the business to hold while the adult service provider is on the premises. 
(c)  In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed that the actor did not have a permit unless the permit was on display as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-270), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-296. - Revocation. 
In the event that the mayor has reasonable grounds to believe that any permit holder has been convicted of an offense as specified in the applicable provision of section 10-276(c)(12) within the time specified therein or after, or has violated a requirement of prohibition of this division, then the mayor may revoke the permit following a notice of the grounds and a hearing as provided in section 10-279. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-271), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-297—10-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATIONS 

Sec. 10-326. - Persons younger than 18 years of age and intoxicated persons prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the business is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is visibly intoxicated to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the business is open for business. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the business at all times during such business' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state or another official government agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph, and such person's date of birth. Appropriate forms of such identification include a passport and military identification card. Appropriate forms of identification shall not include a birth certificate nor any traffic citation or complaint. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-272), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-327. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented business. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the business to be visible from any point outside such business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to opaquely cover each non-opaque area through which a person outside the premises of the business may otherwise see inside the business. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-273), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-328. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to knowingly allow the sale, dispensation or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the premises, including all outdoor areas, of the business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to knowingly allow any person, whether a patron, employee or otherwise, to bring any alcoholic beverage onto the premises of the business, including all outdoor areas. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-274), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-329. - Access, visibility, lighting, supervision. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of any sexually oriented business to permit any employee to provide any entertainment to any customer in any separate area within the business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier, regardless of whether entry to such separate area is by invitation, admission fee, club membership fee or any form of gratuity or consideration. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to allow immediate access by any police officer, fire department official or health officer to any portion of the premises of the business upon request for purposes of inspection of such premises for compliance with this division, or any other applicable law. 
(c)  Each sexually oriented business shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at four feet above floor level. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to ensure that at least one on-site manager is on duty on the premises at all times during which the business is open for business or during which customers are on the premises. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to ensure that all persons acting as managers or adult service providers on the premises hold and display licenses under this division, and that adult service providers comply with section 10-295. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the on-site manager to ensure that no adult service provider or manager is allowed or permitted to conduct any business on the premises unless the on-site manager thereof has in his possession or control an on-site card, as referenced in sections 10-293(d) and 10-295 for the manager or adult service provider. On-site cards shall be made available for immediate inspection by any police officer, fire department official or health officer. Manager or adult service providers working at more than one sexually oriented business may retrieve their on-site cards upon departing the premises in order to present them to a manager at any other sexually oriented business where such persons are employed to hold while the manager or adult service provider remains on those premises. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager to maintain a complete list of all persons, including names and addresses, who conduct any business on the premises and are required to obtain a license under division 2 of this article. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of an owner and manager of a sexually oriented business to provide that all off-street parking areas and premises entries of the business are illuminated from sunset to one hour following the time of closing of the business with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of 1.0 footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce specified criminal conduct as defined in section 10-276(c)(12). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-275), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-330. - Adult service business; operating requirements. 
An adult service business shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations. Failure of a licensee or manager to ensure compliance with the regulations on the premises is a violation of this division by the licensee or manager. 
(1)  A person employed or acting as an adult service provider or manager shall have a valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. A license or a certified copy thereof for each manager or provider shall be maintained on the premises in the custody of the manager at all times during which a person is serving as a provider or manager on the premises. Such licenses shall be provided by the manager for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. 
(2)  A person under the age of 18 years may not receive, observe or provide an adult service. 
(3)  A person may not provide an adult service in an adult service business except upon a stage elevated at least 18 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the adult service is provided, shall be a distance of a least three feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a solid barrier or railing, the top of which is at least three feet in height. A provider or patron may not extend any part of his body over or beyond the barrier or railing. 
(4)  An adult service provider, in the course of providing an adult service, may not perform or simulate any specified sexual activities. 
(5)  Adult services may not be provided between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on and between Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday to 8:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(6)  An adult service may not be provided in any location which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station located in a portion of the premises which is accessible to patrons of the adult service business. 
(7)  An adult service shall not be provided in any location or area of a premises so as to be visible or viewable from a public right-of-way. 
(8)  An adult service provider shall wear his adult service work identification card at all times while on the premises except while providing an adult service. The card shall be affixed to clothing on the front of the person and above waist level so that the picture and license number are clearly visible to patrons. 
(9)  The manager of a sexually oriented business shall be on the premises of an adult service business at all times during which any adult service is provided on the premises. The manager shall wear his work identification card, in the manner described in subsection (8) of this section. 
(10)  An employee shall not touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of a patron or another employee while on the premises, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of an employee. 
(11)  A sign, in a form prescribed by the mayor summarizing the provisions of subsections (3), (4) and (10) of this section shall be posted near the entrance of an adult service business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(12)  An adult service provider or employee shall not touch a customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(13)  An adult service provider or employee shall not approach closer than three feet to any customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(14)  An adult service provider shall not provide an adult service, expose any specified anatomical areas or perform specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any separate area within the business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such are from any other area of the sexually oriented business. 
(15)  An adult service provider or employee shall not, by bending, stooping and other postural movements, display the interior of the anus or vagina. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-276), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-331. - Adult video facility; operating requirements. 
An adult video facility shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations. Failure of a licensee or a manager to ensure compliance with the regulations on the premises is a violation of this division by the licensee or manager. 
(1)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle, as measured at the floor level. 
(2)  The premises shall be configured in such a way that a patron, whether sitting or standing, is visible below the waist by direct line of sight from a manager's station at all times during which the patron is viewing video material or other visual media material characterized by depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. The manager's station shall be located in a portion of the premises accessible to patrons and shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be an unobstructed view from the manager's station. It is the duty of the licensee or manager to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. 
(3)  A sexually oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult video facility at all times that the facility is open for business. The manager shall wear his identification card in the manner described in section 10-295. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-277), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-332. - Conduct of employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to approach closer than three feet to any customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider or any employee to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any separate area within the business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area from the other areas of the business. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to, by bending, stooping or other postural movements, display the interior of the anus or vagina. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider or employee to touch a specified anatomical area of another adult service provider or employee while in the presence of a customer or patron. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to accept a gratuity of any kind from a customer or patron. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an adult service provider at a sexually oriented business that he knows or should know has no adult use license issued by the city pursuant to this division, or which has an adult use license that is under suspension, has been revoked, or has expired. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any employee to display or expose specified anatomical areas while situated outside any structure on the site of a sexually oriented business or while situated at any other location on the site that is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider or any other employee, agent, servant, or any person employed on a contractual basis to engage in any activity commonly referred to as lap dancing or private table side dancing whereby the person intentionally sits upon or rubs against the clothed or unclothed genitals, vulva, anus or buttocks of any patron, customer or spectator. It shall be unlawful as well for the patron, customer or spectator upon whose body the lap dancer or private table side dancer is committing the above proscribed activity to permit the activity to occur. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any provision of this division which may otherwise be construed to the contrary, it shall not be a violation of this division for any employee of a sexually oriented business to expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-278), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-333—10-352. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 10-353. - Other regulations. 
A license required by this division is in addition to any other licenses required by the city, the county, or the state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaging in activities described in this division, including the operation of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the zoning ordinances, as may be required to engage in the business or profession. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-279), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-354. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this division is a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction according to section 1-7, the general penalties clause. With respect to a violation that is continuous in nature, each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any license shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty, and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-280), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-355. - Injunction. 
The operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid license in violation of this division shall constitute a nuisance, and any person who operates or causes to be operated such business shall be subject to a suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-281), 10-14-2009) 
Sec. 10-356. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein. Person so engaged as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this division, including receipt of any license required by this division, within 120 days from its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 1(10-282), 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 10-357—10-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 10-386. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Goods are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated in this article. 
Location means any permanent structure used as a domicile with a permanent street address. 
Yard sale means and includes all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "porch sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at-large is or can be made aware of said sale. 
(Code 2002, § 10-251; Ord. of 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 10-387. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in the city without first filing with the city clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such clerk a license to do so, to be known as a "yard sale permit." 
(b)  Fees. The fee for such permit shall $5.00 per day of sales. 
(c)  Term. Such permit shall not be issued to any one person or location in excess of six times within any 12-month period, nor for more than two consecutive calendar days. No permit shall be issued to the same person or location less than two weeks following a previously issued permit to the same person or location. 
(d)  Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of any given day. 
(e)  Displayed. Each permit issued under this article must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the yard sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the permitted sale. 
(Code 2002, § 10-252; Ord. of 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 10-388. - Information to be filed. 
The information to be filed with the clerk, pursuant to this article, shall be: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or organization conducting said sale. 
(2)  Location at which the sale is to be conducted. 
(3)  Name of owner of the property upon which said sale is to be conducted, and written consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner. 
(4)  Number and dates of days of sale. 
(5)  Date of any past sale. 
(6)  Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by any local, state or federal agency. 
(Code 2002, § 10-253; Ord. of 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 10-389. - Civil penalty. 
Any person conducting a yard sale without having been issued a permit for same, or who shall violate any of the other terms and regulations of this article, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ten days for each violation. 
(Code 2002, § 10-254; Ord. of 7-8-2002) 
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Applicability. 
The rules and regulations in this chapter shall apply to all city-owned cemeteries, except where otherwise specified, to include, where appropriate, all public cemeteries and/or mausoleums within the city limits which are owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-1)) 
Sec. 12-2. - Burial and cemetery required. 
No corpse shall be buried at any place within the corporate limits of the city other than in the public cemeteries of the city or private cemeteries (as hereinafter defined). 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-2)) 
Sec. 12-3. - Application, sale and recording of lots and burial rights. 
The mayor and city clerk or their designee are authorized to execute conveyances of cemetery lots and spaces in city cemeteries in accordance with the schedule of prices adopted from time to time by the mayor and council, subject to the following covenants and restrictions applicable to the city cemeteries, which shall be included in any deed of conveyance of such cemetery lots and spaces, to wit: 
(1)  There shall be no wall or enclosure of any kind installed on the lot conveyed hereunder. 
(2)  There shall be no trees, shrubs or any other plants on said lot. 
(3)  All monumental work placed on the lot shall be of marble, granite or bronze and shall be set on a foundation that will ensure its permanency. 
(4)  The lots shall be used only for the burial of the owner of the lot and his immediate family. 
(5)  The use of wooden boxes is prohibited. 
(6)  The title to the lots conveyed hereunder may not be sold, transferred or assigned until notice of such sale, transfer or assignment is given in writing to the city and entered upon the records of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-3)) 
Sec. 12-4. - Burial permit. 
A burial permit must be obtained from the city clerk whenever a grave in a city cemetery is to be opened. The permit shall contain the name, age, residence, date of death and place of death of the deceased to be buried. The burial permit must be obtained at least 24 hours prior to the time of burial. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-4)) 
Sec. 12-5. - Burials according to plan. 
All burials in city cemeteries will be made according to the cemetery plan on file in the office of the city clerk, and no deviation from these plans shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-5)) 
Sec. 12-6. - Paupers. 
The city clerk shall not authorize burial of any person as a pauper in a city cemetery unless such burial is approved by the county department of family and children services or the mayor, or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem. A permit shall be obtained as in all other interments. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-6)) 
Sec. 12-7. - Monument foundation specifications. 
All foundations for monuments in city cemeteries shall consist of a mixture of one part cement, 2½ parts sand and 4½ parts stone. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-7)) 
Sec. 12-8. - Grave depth; outer burial containers. 
To authorize an interment in the city: 
(1)  All graves shall be excavated to a depth of not less than four feet. 
(2)  All graves, except pauper graves authorized herein and except graves having a length of less than five feet, must have an outer burial container made of metal, concrete, fiberglass or equivalent material acceptable to or approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-8)) 
Sec. 12-9. - Removal of excess dirt. 
Undertakers or any other person opening or closing graves in any city cemetery shall be responsible for the removal of all excess soil from the location, shall have at least a two-foot covering over all graves and shall not mound up the soil. If excess soil is left on or near any grave and must be moved by city employees, the person leaving the excess dirt shall pay to the city the expenses incurred in such work. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-9)) 
Sec. 12-10. - Mutilating, etc., graves, structures or plants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, destroy, deface, injure or remove any grave, tomb, monument, gravestone or any structure placed in the city cemeteries, or any fence, railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb, monument or gravestone or for the ornamentation or protection of said cemeteries, or to willfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree, shrub or plant that may have been planted, or that may be growing in said cemeteries or commit trespass in the limits of said cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-10)) 
Sec. 12-11. - Disposition of trash, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while working on his lot or enclosure, to place upon the lot or enclosure of another, or, in or upon any walk or street in the public cemeteries, any trash, grass or other refuse or litter, but shall place the same where the mayor or city clerk shall direct. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-11)) 
Sec. 12-12. - Disinterment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a body which has been interred in the city cemetery without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. An application for removal must include reasonable proof of the lawful right to remove the body. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-12)) 
Sec. 12-13. - Legal liability; insurance required. 
Any contractor permitted to perform work within the city cemetery shall be solely responsible for any legal liabilities arising in the performance of such work. Prior to commencing any work, a contractor shall provide to the city clerk evidence of general liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00, naming therein the city as an additional insured. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-13(2))) 
Sec. 12-14. - Duty to protect work, repair damage. 
Any contractor performing work in the city cemetery shall provide adequate protection for his work and shall bear the cost of repairing or replacing any damage done by his workman or equipment. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-14)) 
Sec. 12-15. - When work should stop. 
All work of any description shall cease within the city cemetery while a funeral or interment is being conducted nearby. Trucks and workers will withdraw to a reasonable distance from the service. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-15)) 
Sec. 12-16. - Burial of animals, etc., prohibited. 
All city cemeteries are reserved for the purpose of burying the remains of members of the human race. The burying of the remains or carcasses of animals, fowl or pets of any kind in any city-owned or -controlled cemetery is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-16)) 
Sec. 12-17. - Recording of original sales and transfers. 
Original sales and all subsequent transfers of title under this chapter shall be recorded in the office of the city clerk and in the deed records in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-17)) 
Secs. 12-18—12-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAUSOLEUMS 

Sec. 12-40. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply only to city-owned mausoleums and crypts. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-22)) 
Sec. 12-41. - Use of crypts. 
Crypts shall be used only for the entombment of deceased human bodies or their ashes, cremation or other remains, including appropriate containers, urns or caskets. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-23)) 
Sec. 12-42. - Mausoleum crypts; sale prices. 
The prices of mausoleum crypts shall be as determined from time to time by appropriate resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-24)) 
Sec. 12-43. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
All of the rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the use of city cemeteries which are appropriate shall also apply to the city mausoleum. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-25)) 
Secs. 12-44—12-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CEMETERIES 

Sec. 12-75. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private cemetery means a cemetery intended to be used for burial by the landowner or with the landowner's permission and the use of which is or has been restricted by the landowner or the creator of a private cemetery to relatives or some other portion of the general public such as neighbors or friends, but not the community at-large. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-30)) 
Sec. 12-76. - Requirements for authorization. 
A private cemetery will be authorized and a permit therefor issued, pursuant to application, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  A plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor licensed in the state shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk along with the application; 
(2)  A cemetery survey shall indicate that the cemetery contains not less than two acres; 
(3)  The location of the proposed cemetery is compatible with adjacent land uses, existing or proposed highways and any other elements or factors deemed by the city to affect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area surrounding the proposed location; the proposed site must contain a buffered area having a width of not less than ten feet which must be suitably landscaped and maintained with trees and shrubs; and 
(4)  Adequate access is available by public street or private or restricted means of ingress and egress. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-31)) 
Sec. 12-77. - Superintendent to maintain inventory. 
The city clerk shall prepare and maintain an inventory of all private cemeteries established and permitted pursuant to the provision of this article. Other than maintaining in his office and in his records a plat or plats of each such private cemetery within the city and maintaining an inventory of private cemeteries in the city, the city clerk shall have no responsibility for or duty to supervise the operation of any such private cemetery. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-32)) 
Sec. 12-78. - Rules and regulations. 
The owner, creator, trust or any other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a private cemetery shall have the right and responsibility of creating any rules or regulations necessary to or appropriate for the operation of such private cemetery to ensure that the same shall not at any time constitute a health hazard or be or constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-33)) 
Sec. 12-79. - Private cemetery not to be marketed as public cemetery. 
A cemetery created pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be operated and maintained solely as a private cemetery and the lots and burial spaces therein shall not be marketed or sold to the general public and shall be maintained purely as a private or family cemetery. No private or family cemetery created pursuant to the provisions of this article shall at any time become a public cemetery unless the same shall be converted to and become a public cemetery pursuant to and in accordance with the appropriate laws in force at that time and as the same may thereafter be amended. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1(3-34)) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Environment and natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Breeding places means a mound or mass of construction debris, garbage, trash, cut vegetation or woody material. 
Buffer means a ten-foot wide strip of land maintained in such a manner that the growth of vegetation does not interfere with the property of another or exceed ten inches in height. 
Developed property means property upon which a structure has been erected which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. 
Filth means foul, rotten or putrid matter which causes offensive odors and creates unhealthy conditions. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Inoperable vehicle means any vehicle that is resting on blocks, without tires, with major parts missing, in a state of repair which precludes use, or lacking required current registration certificate. 
Litter means any kind of discarded and uncontrolled or unconfined solid waste, garbage, trash, dirt, sand, gravel, refuse, debris, dead animal or thing or substance, whether liquid or solid, that may be deposited, in whole or in part, onto any public or private property, or into any river, public waterway, drain, sewer or receiving basin. 
Poultry means domestic fowl including, but not limited to, water fowl such as geese and duck, birds which are bred for meat and egg production, exhibition, or competition; game birds such as pheasants, partridge, quail and grouse, as well as guinea fowl, pigeons, dove, peafowl; and all other avian species. 
Private property means property privately owned by one or more persons. 
Public property means any street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare in the city or property owned and controlled by any governmental entity. 
Refuse means all putrescible or nonputrescible waste (except body waste) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, equipment, appliances, machinery, abandoned structures, and solid market and industrial waste. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, wood, woody tree cuttings, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Running at-large means any livestock which is not under manual control of a person and which is on any public road of the city or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock, unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every right-of-way publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
Trash means organic and inorganic waste that is too large or heavy to be routinely broken down, compressed, or otherwise disassembled to fit into the normal solid waste containers authorized for use by a household or business for the collection of its waste. The term "trash" includes, but is not limited to, items such as lumber, bedding, furniture and garden tools, but does not include yard trimmings. 
Undeveloped property means property that does not have upon it anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
Vegetation means grass, weeds or plants having no permanent woody stem less than one inch in diameter at breast height and showing no visible signs of having been maintained, as distinguished from a tree or shrub. 
(Code 2002, § 12-1; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-1-2) 
Sec. 14-2. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, the open storage of inoperable or unclaimed operable vehicles on private property is prohibited. 
(b)  Any person lawfully engaged in the repair of damaged or inoperable vehicles may store such vehicles on private property for a period not to exceed 60 days, provided that such vehicles shall be screened from view by a fence or shrubbery on all sides of the property upon which the vehicles are stored. 
(c)  A vehicle lacking a current, valid state tag shall be considered inoperable for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 12-2; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 14-3. - Health standards. 
All developed and undeveloped property shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the establishing of breeding places for small animals or insects that are destructive, annoying or injurious to the public health. 
(Code 2002, § 12-3; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-2) 
Sec. 14-4. - Height of vegetation. 
The growth of grass shall not exceed ten inches in height on any developed property. The growth of vegetation on any undeveloped property shall not encroach upon any developed property adjacent thereto. Undeveloped property lying adjacent to and bordering developed property shall provide a ten-foot buffer with vegetation no greater than ten inches in height. 
(Code 2002, § 12-4; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-3) 
Sec. 14-5. - Collections of filth. 
No person shall allow the collection of filth such as, but not limited to, stagnant water, decayed vegetables and fruits, dead animals, tainted meat, sewage or excrement of any kind to remain on land owned or controlled by him. 
(Code 2002, § 12-5; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-4) 
Sec. 14-6. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall dump, deposit or throw litter including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, rubbish, construction or demolition debris, woody or vegetative debris, appliances, equipment of any type or inoperable vehicles, or trash, on any public or private property. 
(b)  No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, sewer or onto any occupied premises. 
(Code 2002, § 12-6; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), §§ 16-2-5, 16-2-6) 
State Law reference— Littering public and private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 
Sec. 14-7. - Washing or repairing vehicles. 
No person shall wash for profit or gain or repair any vehicle on the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way in the city. Sidewalks in front of all properties shall be kept clean from oil and grease. Businesses or persons engaged in washing, repair or maintenance of vehicles shall collect all wash water in a system connected to the city sanitary sewer system. Such sewer connections must have a properly installed interceptor or separator as may be required by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 12-7; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Bringing fertilizer materials into city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the city any conveyance containing blood and bones, tankage, fish scrap or any odorous material for making fertilizers and to allow the same to remain within the city for more than two hours. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to keep any car containing these materials on its tracks or premises at any one place within the city for more than 30 minutes. 
(Code 2002, § 12-8; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-8) 
Sec. 14-9. - Uncovered wells. 
All wells not properly covered, on enclosed or unclosed lots in the city, are hereby declared nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for any person to have an uncovered well on his premises or to refuse or neglect to cover well and properly protect all persons and animals from danger of any open well on his premises within six hours of notice so to do by any authorized officer of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 12-9; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-2-9) 
State Law reference— Abatement of abandoned wells or holes, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Secs. 14-10—14-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 14-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance, the inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. 
Nuisance per se means any act, occupation or structure that is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effect to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 2002, § 12-41; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-1) 
Sec. 14-38. - Offense; each day a separate offense. 
(a)  It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain, allow or suffer a nuisance to exist. 
(b)  Each day a nuisance shall continue after a finding of violation in accordance with section 14-43 shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as provided in section 14-43. 
(Code 2002, § 12-42; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-5) 
Sec. 14-39. - Initiation of abatement proceedings. 
Proceedings to abate a nuisance shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city police department. A police officer, upon receiving the complaint, shall investigate the circumstances of the complaint and make a determination as to whether or not a nuisance exists. 
(Code 2002, § 12-43; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-6) 
Sec. 14-40. - Notice to abate; time limit. 
(a)  If a police officer determines that a nuisance exists, he shall so inform the city clerk who shall deliver by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property upon which the nuisance exists, and to the occupant, if different than the owner, a notice to abate the nuisance. The notice shall state the specific nuisance charged and the time limit within which the nuisance is to be abated. 
(b)  If the property owner and the occupant, if other than the owner, refuse or otherwise do not accept the certified notice to abate within ten calendar days of mailing, the property shall be posted with a copy of such notice for a period of 15 days, such posting constituting due notice. 
(c)  Except as provided in section 14-45, the time limit for abatement of a nuisance under this article shall be not less than 15 nor more than 30 days following receipt of the notice to abate. 
(Code 2002, § 12-44; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-7) 
Sec. 14-41. - Judicial remedy for noncompliance; complaint and citation. 
If a nuisance has not been abated, the police department shall issue to both the property owner and the occupant, if other than the owner, a citation charging violation of this article and ordering appearance before the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-45; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-8) 
Sec. 14-42. - Hearing. 
At the hearing before the municipal judge prescribed in section 14-41, the city, the property owner and the occupant, if different than the owner, shall each be allowed to present evidence on their behalf. All parties may be represented by legal counsel. 
(Code 2002, § 12-46; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-9) 
Sec. 14-43. - Finding of judge; time limit for abatement; fine. 
(a)  If the municipal judge finds that a nuisance has in fact existed, or does in fact exist, he shall find the property owner and the occupant, if different than the owner, guilty of violation of the appropriate section of this article. 
(b)  Additionally, he shall order abatement of the nuisance and set a time limit within which the violator shall abate and, further, shall set a fine which shall be levied if such violation is not abated by such time limit. 
(c)  The time limit established for the violator to abate the nuisance shall be not less than one day nor more than 15 days. The penalty for continued violation of this article after expiration of the time limit set as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall be a fine according to the general penalties provision for each offense as defined in section 14-38. 
(Code 2002, § 12-47; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-10) 
Sec. 14-44. - Abatement of nuisance by city. 
If a violation is not abated within 30 days following a finding of violation, the mayor shall have the authority to have the nuisance abated. 
(Code 2002, § 12-48; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-11) 
Sec. 14-45. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance per se, or any nuisance where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion is in imminent danger. Such abatement shall be in a manner judged by the mayor to be the most expedient under the instant circumstances. 
(Code 2002, § 12-49; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-12) 
Sec. 14-46. - Placing of liens on property. 
(a)  If the fines as established and levied in accordance with section 14-43 are not paid within 45 days from the date of the judgment, the city shall place a lien on the property on which the nuisance occurred. 
(b)  If, in accordance with section 14-44 or 14-45, the city must abate the nuisance, a lien for all costs incurred by the city to abate the nuisance shall be placed upon the property. 
(c)  All liens placed upon any property shall be prior claims upon the property, and may be collected in accordance with state law. 
(Code 2002, § 12-50; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-13) 
Sec. 14-47. - Phonographs, television or radio; disturbing neighbors. 
No person shall operate any phonograph, television set, music box or radio, musical instruments, singing and the like in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb the neighbors. 
(Code 2002, § 12-51; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-2) 
Sec. 14-48. - Certain conditions declared nuisances. 
The following conditions are declared to be nuisances and shall be abated in accordance with this article: 
(1)  Stagnant water on any lot, whether vacant or built upon; 
(2)  The pollution of public waters, or the injection of matter into the sewer system which would be damaging to the system; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or general annoyance to the public; 
(4)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(5)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts which obstruct clear, safe vision on streets and intersections within the city; 
(6)  Any discarded refrigerators, stoves or other appliances; 
(7)  Any abandoned vehicles; 
(8)  Any dead or decaying matter upon any lot which is odorous or generally annoying to the public, or which may cause disease; 
(9)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal; 
(10)  Overgrown lots, whether vacant or built upon; 
(11)  Vacant structures which have become deteriorated through neglect, nonuse, fire, vandalism or the elements; 
(12)  Any condition not declared a nuisance by this article, but declared to be such elsewhere in this Code; and 
(13)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 2002, § 12-52; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-3) 
Sec. 14-49. - Abandoned property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant or agent, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or appliance of any kind or character to remain on such property longer than 15 days unless such vehicle or appliance is stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner and in accordance with section 14-2, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or such vehicle or appliance is stored in an appropriate place and maintained in a lawful manner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle or appliance on any street, lane or highway within the city for a period longer than 48 hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle or appliance of any type within the city, nor shall any vehicle or appliance be left at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle or appliance reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(d)  Property abandoned in violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 2002, § 12-53; Ord. of 5-14-2001(3), § 16-5-4) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Secs. 14-50—14-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLAND PROTECTION; WETLAND DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Wetland protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 14-72. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through the permitting process. 
(Code 2002, § 12-81; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 101) 
Sec. 14-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Code 2002, § 12-82; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 102) 
Sec. 14-74. - District delineation. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the "generalized wetlands map" and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, and should be consulted by persons considering activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The standards for this district shall comply with Department of Natural Resources, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. Rule 391-3-16-.03, Criteria for Wetlands Protection. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 2002, § 12-83; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 103) 
Sec. 14-75. - Wetland development permit requirements. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located near or in close proximity to a wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the person designated by the city clerk or other person designated by the mayor and council, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended, permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Code 2002, § 12-84; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 104) 
Sec. 14-76. - Permitted uses in a wetland district. 
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging: Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, section 404 Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended, does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption, which include the following: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided that the conservation or preservation does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(4)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(Code 2002, § 12-85; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 105) 
Sec. 14-77. - Prohibited uses in a wetland district. 
The following uses are prohibited in a wetland district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary landfills. 
(Code 2002, § 12-86; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 106) 
Sec. 14-78. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within a wetlands district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimension and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the mayor. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the mayor and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and council or an amount per acre as established from time to time by the mayor and council may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the mayor. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the mayor. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the mayor. Decisions of the mayor may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the mayor. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the mayor. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the mayor. 
(3)  If the mayor discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the mayor and council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation. The mayor may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The mayor shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(2)  Alternate actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city mayor and council may, within the time specified by the superior court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 12-87; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 107) 
Sec. 14-79. - Amendments. 
The regulations of this article and the generalized wetlands map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements of law and as new information becomes available. 
(Code 2002, § 12-88; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 108) 
Sec. 14-80. - Relief assessment. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of the regulations of this article in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 2002, § 12-89; Ord. of 2-12-2001, § 109) 
State Law reference— Tax classification of environmentally sensitive areas, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4. 
Secs. 14-81—14-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 14-104. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste and hazardous material mean any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescent wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. 
(Code 2002, § 12-121; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 19-101) 
Sec. 14-105. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 150 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 12-122; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 19-102) 
Sec. 14-106. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 2002, § 12-123; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 19-103) 
Sec. 14-107. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 14-106: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways, and walks serving buildings permitted under section 14-106; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Code 2002, § 12-124; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 19-104) 
Sec. 14-108. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement, and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the zoning ordinance is presently enacted or may, from time to time, be amended. 
(Code 2002, § 12-125; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 19-105) 
Secs. 14-109—14-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III (a)(6). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-130. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-130)) 
Sec. 14-131. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-131)) 
Sec. 14-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city clerk's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-164. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before July 7, 2012. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 7, 2012. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greatER than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivisions means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD,) as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 3, 2013, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 9, 2012, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after July 9, 2012. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official and not solely triggered by an improvement of repaired project, or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-132)) 
Secs. 14-133—14-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-163. - Lands to which this division applies. 
This division shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-133)) 
Sec. 14-164. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated July 23, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this division. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated July 23, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Warm Springs City Hall, 3655 Whitehouse Parkway, Warm Springs, Georgia 31830. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-134)) 
Sec. 14-165. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this division prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-135)) 
Sec. 14-166. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-136)) 
Sec. 14-167. - Abrogation and grater restrictions. 
This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this division and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-137)) 
Sec. 14-168. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-138)) 
Sec. 14-169. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-139)) 
Sec. 14-170. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this division or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the general penalties clause, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-140)) 
Secs. 14-171—14-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-194. - Designation of administrator. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-141)) 
Sec. 14-195. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Generally. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, and dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-217(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(b)  Review of certification data. The city clerk shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-142)) 
Sec. 14-196. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city clerk shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-164, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 14-195(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-195(a)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 14-195(a)(1)(c) and 14-217(2) or section 14-219(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division. 
(12)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this division in the office which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-143)) 
Secs. 14-197—14-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-216. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this division, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this division, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-144)) 
Sec. 14-217. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-216(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zone, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 14-196(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved: 
1.  On individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height abovegrade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (section 14-216(6)). 
d.  All recreation vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devises, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a and c of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-164 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-145)) 
Sec. 14-218. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
(a)  Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-164, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 14-164, then the city clerk shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-216. 
(4)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)  The city clerk shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-146)) 
Sec. 14-219. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-164, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-217. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-147)) 
Sec. 14-220. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-164 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet aboveground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-216. The city clerk shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section14-195(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-148)) 
Sec. 14-221. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-149)) 
Sec. 14-222. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-150)) 
Secs. 14-223—14-252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-253. - Requirements and conditions. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to applications made pursuant to this division: 
(1)  The mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this division. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city clerk in the enforcement or administration of this division. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this division. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
b.  The provisions of this division are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The city clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this division, the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(1), § 1(12-151)) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Protection Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulations of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Permit for burning weeds, lands, marshes, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-6-90; uncontrolled fire a nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-21. 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled burning means a burn conducted under a permit issued by the volunteer fire chief of the city, or his designee, subject to the conditions imposed thereby. 
Yard trimmings means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance and minor land-clearing operations other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2002, § 14-31; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.1) 
Sec. 16-20. - Violations of article provisions. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable by citation, issued to the responsible party or individual, in the municipal court. In addition to a fine of $250.00, the court may impose restitution to the city for costs associated with responding to calls where controlled burns are discovered without a permit first being obtained. 
(Code 2002, § 14-32; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.7) 
Sec. 16-21. - Prohibited generally; exception. 
Except as provided in this section, open burning on any property designated "commercial" within the geographic limits of the city is hereby prohibited. Controlled, open burns may be conducted under a permit issued by the volunteer fire chief, or his designee. Such permit shall state the dates and hours within which controlled burns are permitted. Due to ever-changing weather conditions, or other good and sufficient cause, to include public nuisance, such permits are subject to immediate cancellation upon notice to the applicant, orally or telephonically. At all times a permitted burn is being conducted, the applicant must have a person of suitable age and competency in attendance at the burn site, with adequate equipment, to control the fire. 
(Code 2002, § 14-33; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.2) 
Sec. 16-22. - Yard trimmings. 
A permit shall be required for the open burning of yard trimmings in areas designated "residential." It shall be a violation of this article to burn yard trimmings without first securing the required permit at city hall, which shall be punishable in accordance with section 16-20. Yard trimmings may also be disposed of by separating from other solid waste, placing leaves in bags, and placing at the curbside for collection by the city on the designated days in accordance with chapter 26. 
(Code 2002, § 14-34; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.3) 
Sec. 16-23. - Land clearing. 
Controlled burning of organic debris from major land clearing activities may be permitted by the city, provided that, as a condition of the permit, grinding and/or on-site incineration, using an approved pit burner, may be required. 
(Code 2002, § 14-35; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.4) 
Sec. 16-24. - Forest fire emergency. 
No permit for open burning shall be issued during such period as an "extreme forest fire emergency" has been issued by the state forestry service, or if such conditions exist that a fire could not be controlled by the volunteer fire department without endangering life or property. 
(Code 2002, § 14-36; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.5) 
Sec. 16-25. - Fees. 
Fees for controlled, open burning permits shall be set by the mayor and council. Such fees may be revised from time to time, and shall be used solely to defray expenses of the city volunteer fire department. 
(Code 2002, § 14-37; Ord. of 5-12-2000, § 13-102.6) 
Chapter 18 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; historical preservation ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter: 
(1)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
(3)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
(4)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-1)) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document approving a proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district, which document must be obtained from an historic preservation commission before such material change may be undertaken. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. The term "historic district" may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. The term "historic district" shall further mean an area designated by the city council as an historic district. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as an historic property. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within an historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of an historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of an historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22. 
Secs. 18-3—18-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 18-23. - Creation. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Warm Springs Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter, "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members: number, appointment terms and compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of three members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of façade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic district designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statues and in the city Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-3)) 
Sec. 18-24. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the warm springs city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of an historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. An historic district is a geographically definable area which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of an historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city or, in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (more than 50 years old); 
b.  Non-historic (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
c.  Intrusion (structure less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the character of the district); 
d.  Vacant. 
(c)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. An historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the region or the state for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, an historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, an historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission or the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  City council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-4)) 
Sec. 18-25. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of an historic property of an historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness. Notices, and right to be heard: 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. Commission action shall be as follows: 
(1)  The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest of the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within an historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. 
(2)  Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and/or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action. Appeals for properties within the city shall be made to the city council. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-5)) 
Sec. 18-26. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-6)) 
Sec. 18-27. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017, § 1(16-7)) 
Chapter 20 - LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Purpose and scope. 
These regulations are to provide for the orderly growth and development of the city and in accordance with the city zoning chapter. The primary purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide for safe and efficient traffic circulation by development of a coordinated street system in relation to major streets, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; 
(2)  To achieve subdivision of larger tracts into building lots of reasonable utility and livability; 
(3)  To provide for the acceptance of land for public rights-of-way; 
(4)  To provide for the installation and construction of utilities, streets, stormwater management facilities, and other public improvements essential to service land being subdivided; 
(5)  To ensure that public improvements will be constructed according to safe and durable standards; 
(6)  To enable the dedication or reservation of land for public schools, parks, and other public purposes; 
(7)  To ensure that development will occur within an environmentally compatible setting and free of flood hazards; 
(8)  To provide for the subdivision of large tracts into smaller parcels of land; and 
(9)  To establish the procedures for submittal, approval, and recording of subdivision plats within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 17-1; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 1.01) 
Sec. 20-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted by the mayor and council pursuant to authority granted by the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 17-2; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 1.02) 
Sec. 20-3. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the development of land within incorporated areas of the city. The city council shall have the final decision on subdivision plats within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 17-3; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 1.03) 
Secs. 20-4—20-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 20-25. - Minimum requirements. 
The provisions contained in this article shall be considered as minimum requirements. When this article imposes greater restrictions than are imposed by other provisions of law or ordinance, this article shall prevail. 
(Code 2002, § 17-21; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 2.01) 
Sec. 20-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
As-built plans means detailed construction plans showing completed improvements as constructed. 
Boulevard means a street developed with two one-way pavements separated by a landscaped median. 
Cluster residential development project means a residential development that provides for the grouping attached and detached residential dwellings on lots that may be smaller than allowed in a zoning district, for the purpose of preserving open space and natural terrain features, and economy in providing public facilities and services. On certain cluster home residential developments, fire-resistant materials may be required. 
Commercial/office subdivision means a subdivision developed with streets and other improvements intended to serve lots for commercial and office development. 
Covenant means an agreement or restriction placed on lots by a developer governing future land use or development which binds future purchasers of the lots. 
Dedication plat means a plat required for the dedication to the city of rights-of-way for streets, public easements for utilities, and other public improvements drawn in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act and suitable for recording. 
Development permit means a permit issued by the city for construction of subdivision improvements and other development, including soil erosion and sedimentation control, rough clearing and grading, street and drainage construction, and stormwater management. 
Easement means a right granted by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, the city, or a private individual or corporation for the use of a portion of the owner's land for a specific purpose, or use as a means of access to other property. Easements shall be designated "public" or "private" depending upon the nature of the usage. 
Flood hazard area means the area threatened by periodic flooding as determined by data and maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Administration, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or hydrological studies utilizing generally accepted engineering practices. Flood hazard areas shall include all land underneath a permanent body of water (e.g., a lake, pond, river or stream) and all land within the limits of a flood having a 100-year return frequency or better. 
Improvements means physical changes to the land which are necessary to create useable lots including (but not limited to) grading and paving streets, sewer and water facilities, hydrants, sidewalks, monuments, changes to existing utilities, and stormwater drainage and detention systems. 
Improvements, construction plans means detailed construction plans prepared by a professional engineer or landscape architect registered in the state, for streets, including typical cross-sections and grade profiles and elevations, layout and elevations of water and sanitary sewer facilities, along with drainage and stormwater management facilities, and soil erosion control. 
Lot of record means a lot which is drawn on an approved subdivision plat recorded in the office of the county clerk of superior court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines, measured along the front yard building setback line as established by the zoning chapter (ch. 38). 
Marginal access street means a local residential street parallel, and adjacent to, a major arterial which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Perennial stream means any stream which flows throughout the entire year, sometimes shown as a solid blue line on a U.S. Geological Survey seven-minute topographic series map (1:24,000). 
Planned unit development (PUD) means development intended to encourage both residential and nonresidential land uses according to a master development plan, with related covenants and restrictions. Developments with a PUD project may have flexibility in the application of development standards when approved according to a master development plan, and to promote the conservation of natural resources, and more efficient use of land. 
Plan means a developer's plan for the subdivision and development of land submitted to the city for approval under this article, consisting of a minimum of: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. A plan showing the basic design and layout of the subdivision. 
(2)  Construction improvement plans in conformance with this article for all public improvements. 
(3)  Final plat. A plat of a development with legal description of all lots, easements and rights-of-way sufficient to reproduce the plat in the field, and which meets the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. The final plat is intended for legal recording of lots, rights-of-way, easements and restrictive covenants. 
Private road means a road that is not maintained by the city or county. Private roads are under the ownership of private entities and maintained by individual property owners. 
Public open space means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public. It includes parks, recreation facilities, school sites, community or public building sites and similar spaces for public use. 
Public utility means firms, corporations or local government authorities providing gas, electricity, telecommunications, and similar essential services. 
Sewer, lateral, means sanitary sewer collection lines within a subdivision or development that transports effluent to a larger trunk sewer for sewage treatment. 
Sewer, trunk, means main sanitary sewer lines which collect sewage from lateral sewer lines for transportation either directly to sewage treatment plants or to a larger interceptor sewer entering a treatment plant. 
Sight distance, intersection sight distance, means sight distance for intersections with minor/major arterial roads use distance measured from a driver's-eye height of 3½ feet to an object height of 4¼ feet. 
Sight distance, stopping distance relative to street design, means the unobstructed vision on a horizontal plane along a street centerline from a driver-eye height of 3½ feet and an object height of six inches. 
Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for temporary and permanent facilities to control soil erosion and sedimentation from subdivision construction sites and commercial and industrial development sites, as required by the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
Streets means the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may be comprised of pavement, shoulders, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage ditches and structures within the street right-of-way lines. Streets are classified as follows: 
(1)  Expressway. High volume limited access thoroughfare through the county and region beyond. 
(2)  Major arterial. A street which is designed or intended for moderate to high levels of traffic flow within the city and county and region beyond, and also includes the state and national highway system in the city and county. 
(3)  Minor arterial. A street similar in function to a major arterial but which is intended to provide moderate levels of traffic flow and greater access to abutting properties. Minor arterials serve as traffic feeders to major arterials and for cross-county and regional traffic. 
(4)  Collector street. A street which carries traffic from local streets to minor and major arterial streets, and may include the principal entrance of a development. 
(5)  Local street. A street designed to provide access to adjoining properties within a subdivision or other development. 
(6)  Stub street. A dead-end street at adjoining property lines intended for future extension to serve the development of adjoining areas. 
Stub-out service means sanitary sewer connection facilities within the street right-of-way provided from lateral sewer line to the private property line for connection to building sewer lines. 
Subdivision re-plat means a plat submitted for changes in the arrangement of existing lots, rights-of-way or improvements in an existing approved and recorded subdivision. 
Townhouse residential development project means a development project (as part of a PUD) that includes attached residential dwellings sharing common walls with fire rating according to the life safety code, and which are planned for individual ownership of the dwelling units and land thereunder. 
Wetlands means areas defined as wetlands by federal law and regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 17-22; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 2.02) 
Secs. 20-27—20-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 20-56. - General compliance for improvements; review and approval of plans. 
Within the territorial limits of this city, no person shall subdivide or rearrange a lot line of any lot or parcel of land, grade and install streets and utilities, or make other improvements to the land without complying with the provisions of this article. The county clerk of superior court shall record no final subdivision plat unless the same has been approved as provided herein. No building permits shall be issued and no public improvements or services shall be authorized or installed in any unapproved subdivision. The review and approval process of a subdivision shall include a pre-application conference and preliminary plan, construction improvements plan, soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, and a final plat. As-built construction plans for public improvements are required to be submitted with the subdivider's final plat. 
(Code 2002, § 17-41; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.01) 
Sec. 20-57. - Pre-application conference and preliminary plan. 
(a)  Purpose of conference. The subdivider shall consult with the city council for advice and assistance prior to preparation of the preliminary plat and application for approval. This will enable the subdivider to become familiar with the approval process, required documents, inspections, subdivision improvement standards adopted by the city council, and development factors which may impact the immediate area near the subdivision. For subdivisions that require access onto a state highway, the subdivider is required to consult with the district engineer for the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). The subdivider shall consult with the city council for access onto city streets, and for improvements to existing streets. 
(b)  Presentation of preliminary plan review. The subdivider shall be prepared to present a preliminary plan at or following the pre-application conference. The preliminary concept plan shall be a general design of the proposed subdivision including boundaries of the proposed subdivision, topographic contours, layout of lots and streets, size and dimensions of the property and proposed lots (including lot area), open space and other planned improvements. 
(c)  Review and transmit; written response. Following the pre-application conference, the city council shall review the preliminary plan and transmit a written response to the subdivider within 15 working days, providing the following information: 
(1)  Conformance to standards in the zoning chapter. 
(2)  Conformance of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive plan and any other plans and development policies of the city. 
(3)  Any recommendations or reports from the city council or other city departments. 
(4)  Any additional information relative to the subdivision approval process or development standards. 
(5)  Recommendations to improve the development and design of the subdivision. 
(Code 2002, § 17-42; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.02) 
Sec. 20-58. - Zoning compliance. 
(a)  The city clerk shall determine that the proposed subdivision meets the requirements of the zoning chapter (ch. 38) and the property is in the correct zoning district. Following written notification by the city clerk that the proposed preliminary plan complies with the zoning chapter and the requirements of this article, and recommendations for improving the development, the subdivider may proceed with preparing a construction improvement plan as provided in this article. 
(b)  If the property is not in the correct zoning district for the proposed subdivision development, the subdivider shall submit an application for rezoning according to the procedures of the zoning chapter. The preliminary plan for the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with the rezoning application for review and recommendation by the city clerk and action by the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 17-43; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.03) 
Sec. 20-59. - Construction improvement plan; filing and review procedures; plan review fee. 
The subdivider shall file with the city clerk seven copies of the construction improvement plan. A plan review fee not to exceed $500.00 shall be paid by the subdivider at the time of submission. The construction improvements plan shall be reviewed by various city departments, including the water and sewer department, county building and code enforcement department, police department, fire department, and any other city and county organizations that will be impacted by the subdivision. The city clerk shall notify the school district about the proposed subdivision. The plan review process shall determine compliance with the regulations of this article and the zoning chapter and make any changes necessary to improve the subdivision. 
(1)  If the plans are determined to be incomplete or otherwise deficient by the city, they shall be returned to the subdivider for changes and corrections. 
(2)  If the plans are approved with modifications, the changes shall be indicated on the plat. A copy of the plans with changes indicated shall be returned to the subdivider who shall have the revisions made by the engineer who prepared the plans. 
(3)  Once the preliminary plan has been reviewed and required revisions, if any, are made, the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city clerk and subsequently to the city council for final approval. 
(4)  Following review and approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the subdivider shall proceed with construction improvement plans. 
(Code 2002, § 17-44; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.04) 
Sec. 20-60. - Construction improvements plan/plat; required information. 
The plat shall have the following information: 
(1)  Description. 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision, including unit, phase, and lines separating phases and/or units. 
b.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of subdivider, engineer, landscape architect and surveyor. Show 24-hour contact person. 
c.  Graphic scale, north arrow, and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
d.  Location map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area, including directions and distances to readily identifiable landmarks in the surrounding area. 
e.  Acreage to be subdivided. 
f.  Number of lots. 
g.  Density in dwellings per acre (gross). 
h.  Total lineal feet of roads (per phase and total). 
i.  Zoning district of the property, including all setback provisions, as well as any special conditions of zoning imposed by the city (i.e., lot sizes, number of lots, minimum house size). 
(2)  Existing conditions. 
a.  Topographic contours and vertical intervals of not more than two feet when a new street is involved in a subdivision including outline of wooded areas, vegetation and surface drainage. 
b.  Topographic data shall be based on a field survey or aerial survey. 
c.  Deed record names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivision, along with zoning of the adjacent parcels. 
d.  In case of a re-subdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed re-subdivision imposed thereon. 
e.  Show whether or not any portion of the project is in a 100-year floodplain or contains known statutory wetlands. 
f.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. 
g.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads with sizes, grades and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. 
h.  Location of streams, lakes, wetlands and land subject to a 100-year flood hazard, including contours elevations. State if elevations are taken from a surveyed stream on a FEMA map or if the elevations are from an independent study (HEX-2, QUICK-2, etc.). Wetland areas shall be field located. 
i.  Notation that live streams and/or wetland lie/do not lie within this subdivision, unit, or phase. Provide a copy of the wetlands delineation report from a registered soil scientist in the state. 
j.  Existing drainage patterns. The boundaries of the pre-developed drainage basins shall be shown on a map. The map shall include the number of acres in each basin, the pre-developed runoff coefficient and the time of concentration. 
(3)  Proposed conditions. 
a.  Layout and names of proposed roads, alleys, public walkways/bikeways (i.e., sidewalks, trails, paths, bicycle facilities) with width of pavement and rights-of-way. 
b.  Lot dimensions, including lot area. Lots with detention ponds must meet minimum zoning area requirements outside the area of the detention pond. Show all existing and proposed easements. Show drainage easements for storm drainage pipes which cross individual lots. 
c.  Flood elevations on any lots within a 100-year flood hazard area. In addition, the foundation footing elevation that is a minimum of one foot above the established 100-year flood elevation shall be shown. This data may be shown either on the lot layout or in tabular form. 
d.  Construction plans of streets including typical cross-section and grade profiles. Show percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. The minimum centerline shopping sight distance for interior streets is 200 feet. 
e.  Show the centerline stopping distance for all points of access onto county roads. Show posted speed limit of existing roads. 
f.  Construction plans of storm drainage systems with pipe sizes, length, grade, location of outlets, runoff and velocity calculations, etc. All storm drainage systems carrying off-site runoff shall be designed for the 100-year storm event. All storm pipes within the county right-of-way shall be asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe. 
g.  Improvements construction plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all appurtenances. 
h.  Improvement construction plan of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
i.  Easements for drainage and future sanitary sewers along all side and rear lot lines. 
j.  Proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
k.  Final contours. In some cases, the street profiles will suffice in showing the amount of cut and fill; however, in many cases, final contours need to be shown on the plans. 
l.  Stormwater management. A hydrological study should be included and the necessary outlet control structures should be shown on the plan. No increase in runoff or velocity will be permitted. Attach engineer's certification that the improvements will not adversely impact down-stream properties. 
m.  Proposed drainage patterns. The boundaries of the post-developed drainage basins shall be shown on a map. The map shall include the number of acres in each basin, the post-developed runoff coefficient and the time of concentration. 
n.  Show a five-foot high fence on all detention ponds with a 100-year ponding elevation over four feet. 
o.  Detail drawings. Any structural practice used should be explained and illustrated with detail drawings and must, at minimum, meet city standards. 
p.  Show the following notes on all plans: 
1.  A 20-foot storm sewer and sanitary sewer easement exists along each property line and along each lot line, centered on lot lines, for future drainage lines. 
2.  All storm drains shall be extended a minimum of 30 feet behind any future residence or building. 
3.  Grade stakes shall be set on all streets prior to any street grading. An as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted and approved by city prior to the installation of curb and gutter or water lines. 
4.  An as-built detention pond detail and revised hydro study shall be submitted to the city prior to installation of the water line or curb and gutter. 
5.  All undisturbed buffers shall be field located; staked and flagged or marked with "tenzar" (or similar type fencing), and shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to grading. 
(Code 2002, § 17-45; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.05) 
Sec. 20-61. - Soil erosion, sedimentation and drainage plan; filing and review procedures. 
(a)  At or following submission of the construction improvements plan, the developer shall file for approval a soil erosion, sedimentation and drainage plan prepared in accordance with state MPDES. No permit shall be issued by the city, nor shall any other land distributing activity commence upon the tract to be developed until this plan has been reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  If the tract to be developed consists of five or more acres, or is part of a common plan of development of five acres or more, the developer shall additionally demonstrate compliance with EPD general permit no. GAR 100000 for stormwater discharges associated with construction activities. 
(c)  Once the construction improvement plans and soil erosion, sedimentation and drainage plans have been reviewed that all required revisions, if any, are made, the plans will be approved by the city council and the subdivider may apply for the issuance of a development permit so that construction may begin in accordance with the requirements of article IV of this chapter. Before issuing any permits, the city clerk shall require proof of all county, school and city taxes owing on the property have been paid. 
(Code 2002, § 17-46; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.06) 
Sec. 20-62. - Final plat—Filing and review procedures. 
(a)  Once the proposed improvements are substantially in place, the subdivider shall submit to the city council four copies of the final plat for review and comment. The final plat shall conform substantially to the construction improvement plans as approved, and it shall include only that portion of the construction improvement plan that has been developed and is to be recorded, provided that it complies with all requirements of this article. 
(b)  When the final plat has been approved by the city council, the subdivider shall supply one original drawing of the final plat on Mylar or sepia in black ink, as well as ten copies (blue lines) of the final plat prepared by a licensed professional engineer or landscape architect and a surveyor, minimum size 8½-inch by 11-inch, maximum size 17-inch by 22-inch. In addition, all other necessary documentation for recording must be submitted at this time. 
(c)  Once the final plat is approved by the city council, one copy shall be recorded in the clerk of the superior court's office, and one copy each shall be provided to the county tax assessor's office, county board of education, county emergency 911 services, county voters registration, the postmaster general, and the utilities protection center. The city clerk shall retain the Mylar and the remainder of the copies. 
(d)  The procedure for consideration of a final plat for approval by the city council shall consist of the following steps: 
(1)  Completion of public improvements. After completion of the physical development of the subdivision, the developer shall submit a checklist specifying the procedure in obtaining the various approvals that will release the subdivision for final plat consideration. 
(2)  As part of this process, the subdivider shall submit a final plat and as-built drawings, along with a two-year maintenance bond or letter of credit. Letters of credit from banks having local offices are preferred. All bonds or letters of credit shall be subject to approval by the city attorney who shall be authorized to reject a bond or letter of credit if he reasonably determines the obligor or surety is unreliable or there would be practical difficulties in enforcing the obligation of the bond or letter of credit. The bond or letter of credit shall name the city as obligee. The amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be equal to one-half the cost of the streets, plus the full cost of detention facilities. The maintenance bond or letter of credit shall remain in effect for two years from the date of final plat approval. During the two-year period, it shall be the subdivider's responsibility to repair any defects that occur in the streets, sidewalks, drainage systems and the stormwater detention systems. 
(3)  A maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be released at the end of the two-year period. Ninety days prior to expiration, a final inspection by the city engineer of all subdivision improvements will be performed to determine the need for any repairs. If repairs are necessary, the city engineer will notify the subdivider in writing. 
(4)  If the subdivider fails to take the necessary action to make repairs within 30 days of notification by the city, then the city attorney will authorize the surety or bank issuing the bond or letter of credit to release to the city all or any part of the funds needed to make repairs. Upon release of the funds, the city engineer will take action to ensure that the necessary repairs to streets, sidewalks, and drainage or stormwater detention facilities are completed. 
(5)  The city council, through the city attorney, may require the maintenance bond or letter of credit to be extended to ensure the completion of repairs started but not completed for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
(Code 2002, § 17-47; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.07) 
Sec. 20-63. - Same—Acceptance of public improvements. 
(a)  The final plat will be presented to the mayor and council for dedication of public improvements only after the following items have been submitted and completed: 
(1)  Application for final plat approval. 
(2)  Final plat prepared for recording drawn to the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Copies of all material test results for base and asphalt paving. 
(4)  Verification by the city engineer that all required inspections have been made and approved and the improvements to the subdivision, including street construction, sidewalks, drainage systems, and right-of-way seeding, are in compliance with approved plans; all underground utilities have been installed; and street and traffic signs are installed. 
(5)  Verification that the soil erosion and sedimentation control for the subdivision is in compliance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(6)  Verification by the water and sewer department that all requirements have been met, including submission of required documents and inspections. 
(7)  Two-year maintenance bond or letter of credit. 
(8)  As-built drawings of all water and sewage facilities submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(9)  As-built drawings of streets and sidewalks, including the existing centerline profile of all newly constructed streets, and the top and invert elevations of all drainage structures. 
(10)  As-built construction improvement plans for storm sewers with grade, pipe sizes and points of discharge. 
(11)  As-built construction improvement plans for storm drainage system with grade, pipe sizes and location of outlets and other drainage structures, street profiles and stormwater management facilities. 
(12)  As-built construction improvement plans for water distribution systems with pipe sizes and locations of hydrants and valves. 
(13)  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, attached in form for recording. 
(b)  The as-built drawing shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect and a surveyor at a minimum scale of 100 feet to the one inch. 
(Code 2002, § 17-48; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.08) 
Sec. 20-64. - Same—Processing fee. 
Prior to the approval of the final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall pay to the city a fee of $50.00 per lot shown on the final plat. 
(Code 2002, § 17-49; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.09) 
Sec. 20-65. - Same—Required information. 
The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer of landscape architect and a surveyor, at a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision, including unit and/or phase of development (if applicable). 
(2)  North point, scale and date. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the owners of record of the property to be subdivided. 
(4)  Subdivider name, address and phone number. 
(5)  Name, addresses, phone numbers and registration seal of the engineer or landscape architect and a surveyor who prepared the final plat. 
(6)  Certification by surveyor that all monuments exist and their sizes, locations and materials are correctly shown on the plat. 
(7)  Legal description of the property including reference to land lot and district lines; street right-of-way lines; easements and other rights-of-way; property lines of lots and other sites with accurate dimensions to nearest 0.01 of a foot; bearings and angles on all lines; radii, arcs and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute. 
(8)  Blocks designated by letter and lots by numerical order. 
(9)  Current zoning, including setbacks and any special conditions placed on the rezoning of the property, or stipulated in deed restrictions or restrictive covenants (e.g., minimum house size, type of construction.) 
(10)  The layout of the subdivision, including the following information: 
a.  All street right-of-way boundaries, street names, addresses, tax identification numbers, bearings, angles of intersection, and right-of-way and easement widths. 
b.  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc. 
c.  Drainage, sanitary sewer and utility easements along all side and rear lot lines, and natural or artificial watercourses as required in article IV of this chapter. 
d.  Detention and maintenance and access easement to be shown, minimum 20 feet to a public right-of-way. 
e.  Location of all storm drains including pipe sizes. 
f.  Any buffer areas required in the zoning chapter, including statements whether or not the buffer areas are to be landscaped, undisturbed, fenced, or a combination-type buffer. 
g.  All lot lines measured to 0.01 of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in 10,000 feet. 
h.  Individual lot sizes measured in square feet. This figure may be placed on the lot or in a table with addresses and tax parcel identification numbers. All lots with detention ponds must meet the minimum zoning area requirements outside the area of the detention pond. 
i.  The outline of all property to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be reserved for common use of all property owners in the subdivision with the purpose of the dedication or reservation indicated. This shall include cemeteries or grave sites as stated in section 20-141. 
j.  Location of sidewalks and pedestrian and/or bicycle ways. 
k.  Location and elevation of any 100-year flood hazard area, including the foundation elevation which is one foot above the established 100-year flood elevation for each lot located within the flood hazard area. This flood hazard area shall include both studied and unstudied streams, including drainageways as designated on the preliminary plat. 
l.  The following notations and certifications: 
1.  Notation that: "Live streams and/or wetlands lie (do not lie) within this subdivision, or unit and phase." If wetlands do lie within this subdivision, or unit and phase, the plat must include the following notation: "Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Lot owners may be subject to penalty of law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization." 
2.  Notation that: "The lot owners may be subject to penalty of law for any unauthorized land distributing activity conducted on their property." 
3.  Notation that: "All storm drains shall be extended a minimum of 30 feet behind any future residence or building, and shall empty or drain into a sufficient drainage easement or watercourse." 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
(Code 2002, § 17-50; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.10) 
Sec. 20-66. - Lot divisions—Generally. 
Lot divisions are the dividing of individual tracts of land into two or more separate lots without creating a subdivision as defined herein (no new street or utilities required.) All lot divisions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning chapter (ch. 38). The city council shall have the authority to approve lot division. No building permit shall be issued for a tract of land created as the result of a lot division without the approval of the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 17-51; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.11) 
Sec. 20-67. - Same—Required information. 
A plat shall be prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect and surveyor, and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  North arrow, scale and date. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owners of record of the property to be subdivided. 
(3)  Subdivider name and address. 
(4)  Name, address and registration seal of the surveyor who prepared the final plat. 
(5)  Certification by a surveyor that all monuments exist and their size, locations and materials are correctly shown on the plat. 
(6)  Legal description of the property, including reference to land lot district lines; street right-of-way lines; easements and other rights-of-way; property lines of lots and other sites with accurate dimensions to nearest 0.01 of a foot; bearings and angles on all lines; radii, arcs and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest second. 
(7)  Blocks designated by letter and lots by numerical order. 
(8)  The layout of the lot division including the following information: 
a.  All street right-of-way boundaries, street names, addresses, tax parcel identification numbers, bearings, angles of intersection and right-of-way easement widths. 
b.  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc. 
c.  Drainage and utility easements along all side and rear lot lines and watercourses, as required in article IV, improvements standards, of this article. 
d.  All lot lines measured to nearest 0.01 of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in 10,000 feet. 
e.  Individual lot sizes measured in square feet. This figure may be placed on the lot or in a table with addresses and tax parcel identification numbers. 
(9)  Current zoning, including the required setback lines by the zoning chapter (ch. 38) and any other setback lines established by public authority or stipulated in the deed restrictions. 
(10)  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached in form for recording. 
(11)  Soil survey prepared by a qualified, state-registered soil scientist and certified for approval by the health department. 
(12)  Location and elevation of any 100-year flood hazard area, including the minimum foundation elevation for each lot affected by the 100-year flood hazard. 
(13)  Statement on the existence of wetlands or live streams on the site. 
(Code 2002, § 17-52; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.12) 
Sec. 20-68. - Dedication plats—Generally. 
A plat is required for the dedication to the city of right-of-way and public improvements such as roads or sewer or water lines, and which will provide access or service to development, or which will serve future development in an area or be sited for public facilities as described in article V of this chapter. The approval process for dedication plats shall be the same as for a final subdivision plat. A two-year maintenance bond or letter of credit shall be required for all public improvements as required for final plats. 
(Code 2002, § 17-53; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.13) 
Sec. 20-69. - Same—Required information. 
The plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect and a surveyor at a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  An accurate legal description of the property to be dedicated, including reference land lot lines. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owners of record of the property, the subdivider, and the engineer or landscape architect and surveyor who prepared the plat. The registration seal of the engineer or landscape architect and surveyor shall be on the plat. 
(3)  North arrow, scale and date. 
(4)  The locations, widths and names of any platted streets and easements adjacent to the property. 
(5)  The locations, sizes and grades of any existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures adjacent to the property. 
(6)  Contour elevations at two-foot intervals. 
(7)  The layout, names and right-of-way widths of all streets, easements or tracts of land to be dedicated. 
(8)  The location and sizes of all proposed catchbasins, culverts and other drainage structures. 
(9)  All plat boundary lines measured to the nearest 0.01 of a foot, and bearings and angles based on an accurate field survey. 
(10)  The location of all permanent reference monuments as specified in article IV of this chapter. 
(11)  The layout of the proposed improvements, including the following information when applicable: 
a.  Street right-of-way boundaries, names, bearings, angles of intersections and widths. 
b.  Easement boundaries, bearings and widths for improvements to be dedicated. 
(12)  The 100-year flood elevation taken from a FEMA flood insurance map. 
(Code 2002, § 17-54; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 3.12) 
Secs. 20-70—20-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-97. - Street layout and design. 
The location, arrangement, extent, width and grade of all streets shall conform to this article, and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The layout of a subdivision shall conform to the requirements of the chapter 38 zoning and design principles described in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 17-71; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.01) 
Sec. 20-98. - Conformity. 
Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes any part of a major arterial or collector street, such part of said street shall be installed by the subdivider in the location and at the full width indicated by the functional classification for right-of-way and pavement widths indicated in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 17-72; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.02) 
Sec. 20-99. - Relation to adjoining street system. 
(a)  Where appropriate to the subdivision design, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. 
(b)  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing and future development of adjacent tracts. 
(c)  When there exists adjoining the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted half-width street or alley, the other half-width shall be platted. 
(Code 2002, § 17-73; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.03) 
Sec. 20-100. - Subdivision streets on state highways. 
Whenever a proposed subdivision has streets that will enter on a state highway maintained and controlled by GDOT, the preliminary plat shall be submitted by the developer to the GDOT district engineer for approval. 
(Code 2002, § 17-74; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.04) 
Sec. 20-101. - Restrictions of access. 
When a tract fronts on a state highway, major arterial or minor arterial street, the subdivider may be required to have all residential lots to be provided with frontage only upon a collector or local street. 
(Code 2002, § 17-75; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.05) 
Sec. 20-102. - Access from a single street entrance. 
(a)  The design of street access to subdivisions shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations relating to street and intersection design and shall be consistent with accepted engineering standards and practices. 
(b)  The maximum number of lots per a single subdivision entrance is 35, unless due to the peculiar shape, or the topography of a tract of land or other unusual condition whereby a variance must be obtained from the city council. The total number of entrances required for a subdivision shall be determined by the city based on the number of lots within the subdivision. 
(c)  At its discretion, the city council may require a multi-lane boulevard entrance to a proposed subdivision development consistent with the city's design requirements. 
(Code 2002, § 17-76; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.06) 
Sec. 20-103. - Street right-of-way widths. 
Although certain conditions may require additional right-of-way, the minimum width of street right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall not be less than as follows: 
(1)  Major arterial: 100 feet. 
(2)  Minor arterial: 80 feet. 
(3)  Collector street: 80 feet. 
(4)  Local street: 60 feet with curbs. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac: 55-foot radius turnaround, residential local streets with curbing. 
(6)  "T" or "Y" turnaround: same as required street right-of-way. 
(7)  Mid-block pedestrian way: ten feet. 
(Code 2002, § 17-77; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.07) 
Sec. 20-104. - Additional width on existing streets. 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the minimum street right-of-way requirements in section 20-103. 
(Code 2002, § 17-78; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.08) 
Sec. 20-105. - Half streets. 
(a)  Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision. 
(b)  Where it is determined to be practical to require the dedication of the additional half when adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted to create a full width right-of-way serving the adjoining tracts of land. 
(Code 2002, § 17-79; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.09) 
Sec. 20-106. - Pavement widths. 
The minimum pavement for streets required to be installed at the subdivider's expense are shown below. 

 
*Width from back of curbs.  **For four-lane highway; if two lanes, 28 feet with curbs and 24 feet without curbs. 
(Code 2002, § 17-80; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.10) 
Sec. 20-107. - Speed limits. 
The posted speed limit on all local streets within a subdivision shall be 25 miles per hour. The police department shall determine the speed limit for all other street classifications subject, as necessary, to approval by GDOT. 
(Code 2002, § 17-81; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.11) 
Sec. 20-108. - Curbs. 
Curbs shall be required in all residential subdivisions. Curbs shall be required for streets in commercial and industrial subdivisions. Curbs in all subdivisions shall be roll-back curbs 24 inches wide, six inches high, with an 18-inch gutter. All curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. Curbs shall be designed to provide handicapped access at street intersections, wherever sidewalks are constructed. 
(Code 2002, § 17-82; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.12) 
Sec. 20-109. - Street grades and elevations. 
Grades on major and minor arterials shall not exceed five percent and grades on local residential streets shall not exceed 12 percent. The minimum grade on any street shall be one percent. 
(Code 2002, § 17-83; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.13) 
Sec. 20-110. - Horizontal curves. 
The radius of horizontal curves on local residential streets within a subdivision shall be no less than 150 feet. The horizontal radius for collector and arterial streets or any streets with a designed speed of more than 25 miles per hour shall comply with AASHTO standards. 
(Code 2002, § 17-84; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.14) 
Sec. 20-111. - Vertical curves. 
All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves that are as long as conditions permit and under no circumstances should they be shorter than established minimums prescribed by approved highway design methods. 
(Code 2002, § 17-85; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.15) 
Sec. 20-112. - Centerline sight distance. 
Minimum street centerline sight distances shall be designed relative to the designated speed of the street and should be measured above the street centerline using a driver-eye height of 3½ feet and an object height of 4¼ feet. The minimum stopping sight distance for any street shall not be less than 200 feet. 
(1)  Minimum centerline site distances relative to design speed posted on streets are: 

 
*The minimum stopping distance for streets shall not be less than 200 feet. 
(2)  Sight distance for intersections with minor/major arterials use intersection sight distance measured from a driver's-eye height of 3½ feet to an object height of 4¼ feet. 

 
*Data taken from AASHTO Guide, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and   Streets. 
(Code 2002, § 17-86; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.16) 
Sec. 20-113. - Intersection geometries. 
(a)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. In residential subdivisions, no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 80 degrees nor more than 100 degrees. 
(b)  Street intersections in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be at an angle of not less than 90 degrees. 
(c)  The minimum curb radius at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet in residential subdivisions. A minimum 25-foot radius shall be required at intersections with existing collector and arterial streets maintained by the city or county. 
(d)  The minimum curb radius of street intersections for industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be 50 feet. 
(e)  Pedestrian ramps shall be designed for all intersections in accordance with standard drawings for subdivisions and residential developments designed to include sidewalks and shall meet the minimum standards in regards to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The curb shall be depressed to accommodate future installations at the same time as the street. 
(Code 2002, § 17-87; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.17) 
Sec. 20-114. - Street intersection offset. 
Street intersections shall have a minimum centerline offset of at least 125 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 17-88; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.18) 
Sec. 20-115. - Tangents on reverse curves. 
A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and minor arterial streets, or no any street where the posted speed limit will be 35 miles per hour or greater. 
(Code 2002, § 17-89; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.19) 
Sec. 20-116. - Dead-end streets. 
(a)  General design. Local streets designed to have one end permanently closed and not connected with any existing street, proposed future street, or not intended to extend to the property line of an adjacent tract, shall be no longer than seven times the lot width provided by the zoning chapter, unless necessary due to the topographic or other physical conditions of the property. 
(1)  Permanent dead-end streets. Permanent dead-end streets shall be joined by a cul-de-sac with a paved turnaround having an outside diameter of 80 feet (40-foot radius) and a right-of-way of at least 110 feet diameter. Dead-end streets designed to be permanent and that exceed more than 800 feet in length may be required to have a cul-de-sac turn around midway between the entrance intersection and the end of the street to provide maneuvering for emergency vehicles, when the dead-end street is the only street in a subdivision. 
(2)  Temporary dead-end streets. Stub streets that are intended to provide access for future development within a tract of land or adjacent tracts shall be required to have a temporary turnaround area having a diameter of at least 80 feet, consisting of six inches of graded aggregate base. 
(b)  Bond or letter of credit required. For subdivisions with a temporary turnaround, it shall be required of the subdivider to provide a bond or letter of credit equal to the cost of permanent cul-de-sac construction, for a period of two years. Failure of the subdivider to extend the street or to construct a permanent cul-de-sac shall result in the city using the bond or letter of credit funds to complete the cul-de-sac construction. 
(Code 2002, § 17-90; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.20) 
Sec. 20-117. - Private streets. 
There shall be no private street platted in any subdivision. Every lot in subdivided property shall be served from and shall have frontage onto a street dedicated to the city; provided, however, when a developer intends to build a "gated community," upon approval of the mayor and council, after review by the city attorney, such private streets may be approved if protective covenants make reasonable provision for maintenance by a mandatory homeowners' association. 
(Code 2002, § 17-91; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.21) 
Sec. 20-118. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be provided at the rear of lots in residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions when approved by the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 17-92; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.22) 
Sec. 20-119. - General construction requirements. 
(a)  Every subdivision developer shall be required to follow the requirements of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, to grade and improve streets, alleys and rights-of-way, to install curbs or ditches when required and to install street name signs in accordance with city specifications. Every subdivider shall be required to comply with the subdivision inspection procedures in article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  All street design and construction and related material shall be in strict accordance with GDOT "Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges," 1993 edition, and all revisions thereto and the requirements of sections 20-120 and 20-121. Where circumstances dictate variations from the standard specifications upon recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may vary the requirements, provided the design of materials accepted are in all ways commensurate with good practice. 
(c)  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the developer. The following is a summary of the improvements required: 
(1)  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width right-of-way by the subdivider so that the pavements and sidewalks, when installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the city. 
(2)  Organic matter. All stumps, tree limbs and other organic material shall be removed from the rights-of-way and building site areas and disposed of in accordance with law in a permitted landfill. No stumps, limbs or other organic material, including building debris, scrap lumber, etc., shall be buried anywhere in the subdivision development. In developments over ten acres, the city clerk may issue a permit authorizing burning, using approved pit burners; provided all other state and local regulatory permits are first obtained and the city is not under a burn warning or hazardous air conditions alert. 
(3)  Profile. Three copies of an as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted. The profile shall include both proposed and as-built centerline elevations at every even station. No curb and gutter or waterlines shall be installed prior to subgrade approval. 
(4)  Storm damage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary curb, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches and detention areas, shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water and prepared by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect. 
(5)  Roadway surfacing. After preparation of the subgrade the roadbed shall have base material and paving applied according to city specifications. 
(Code 2002, § 17-93; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.23) 
Sec. 20-120. - Construction requirements for residential subdivision streets. 
(a)  The design and construction requirements for residential subdivisions shall comply with the minimum standards shown in table 20-1. 
(b)  The grading, base and pavement for residential street construction shall be as follows: 
(1)  Grading. All streets shall be graded to the elevations shown on the approved construction plans. 
a.  Clearing and grubbing. After the development permit has been issued, a preconstruction conference has been held, and the city clerk duly notified, the contractor may begin clearing and grubbing the project, after which all required silt and erosion control measures shall be installed and approved. All trees, stumps, logs, roots, grass, weeds, poles and other objectionable matter shall be cleared and grubbed from within the construction limits of the project. A 30-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained on all property lines prior to submission of construction improvement plans. No rubbish or other material resulting from the clearing and grubbing of the roadway may be buried within the construction limits of the roadway or detention ponds. If burning is permitted, all burn pits must be located outside of the roadway construction limits. 
b.  Excavation. All grading operations shall be planned and executed by the contractor in such a manner as to provide suitable subgrade material in the top 12 inches of the roadway. In areas where the material in place is not suitable for subgrades, these areas shall be undercut a minimum of 12 inches and backfilled with suitable material. All rock and boulders in the roadbed shall be excavated to a depth of at least 12 inches below the subgrade and the space backfilled to the correct grade with suitable material. Any stones, broken rock, or boulders resulting from the grading of the roadway may not be placed in any roadway fill area except when approved by the development inspector and then under his supervision. During the construction of the roadway on a day to day basis, the roadbed edges shall be kept lower than the center and the grading shall be done so that the surfaces of the excavated areas and fill will be kept reasonably smooth and well drained. Adequate surface ditches shall be cut at the tops of cut sloes, extending to each end of the cuts in order to carry the water from the side hill. Side ditches or gutter emptying from cuts to fill areas shall be turned outward so as to prevent erosion of the fill slopes. 
c.  Placement of fill. Fill construction shall not begin until all clearing and grubbing of the fill area has been completed. All depressions in the ground shall be filled level with the adjacent surface using suitable material and compacted to the approximate density of the surrounding soil before placement of the fill is begun. The entire area upon which fill is to be placed shall be plowed, scarified and finely broken up to a depth of a minimum of six inches. Before the placement of fill material is begun, all loosened soil shall be compacted to the approximate density of the underlying soil. Where a depth of fill and surfacing is three feet or less, the original ground shall be compacted to the approximate density of the underlying soil. Where a depth of fill and surfacing is three feet or less, the original ground shall be compacted a minimum 12 inches deep to at least 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined from representative samples of the material being compacted. In areas where layers of organic or other unstable materials exists, the existing ground shall be excavated, for the full width of the fill area, to an underlying stable material. The subgrade thus created shall then be compacted to the approximate density of the underlying material. All fill material shall be deposited and spread in uniform horizontal layers, not more than six inches thick, for the full width of the fill area, and these layers shall be kept uniform by the use of graders, bulldozers or other approved equipment. Each layer shall be compacted within the range of optimum moisture content necessary to achieve the compaction required. Material containing too much water shall be dried to the correct moisture content. If the material is too dry, water shall be added and uniformly mixed with the soil before it is compacted. Fills shall be compacted to at least 95 percent of the maximum dry density to within the top 12 inches of the fill. The top 12 inches of the fill shall be compacted to at least 100 percent of the maximum dry density. The entire roadbed shall be scarified and compacted with a sheep's foot or other approved rollers. While the work is in progress, the contractor shall maintain the surface in a manner so that the excavation, fills, subgrade, base course and ditches always present a smooth and even surface. 
d.  Equipment on site. The contactor shall have available on the job at all times at least one motor patrol grader with adequate power to blade and maintain the roadbed. Suitable scarifiers shall also be available for use whenever necessary. 
e.  Final finishing of roadway. After all excavation has been completed and all fills have been placed, the entire road bed surface shall be finally shaped with a grading machine supplemented with hand work whenever required to secure a smooth surface and uniform cross-section. Slopes of cuts and fills shall also be carefully shaped to the true section specified. When final shaping is finished, the road surface shall conform accurately to the line, grade and cross-section shown of plans, and no roots, sod, grass, stones or other unsuitable material shall remain in the top 12 inches of the finished road bed. All ditches and drains shall be opened to effectively drain the roadway. 
(2)  Placement of curb and gutter. After sanitary sewer and water lines have been installed, all storm drainage in place, and the final finishing of the roadway has been approved by the city engineer, the installation of the concrete curb and gutter may begin. All concrete curb and gutter shall be in accordance with city standards. Any curb and gutter which does not conform to a true section, texture, line and grade shall be removed and replaced as directed by the city engineer. 
(3)  Subgrade. Before placing any pavement base, the entire surface of the subgrade shall be plowed, harrowed, and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. If a subgrade stabilization material is required, it shall be incorporated into the subgrade at this time. After the material has been thoroughly mixed the subgrade shall be brought into a proper line and grade and compacted to 100 percent of maximum dry density just prior to placing the base material. The centerline profile shall conform to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance of one-half inch. The acceptance crown tolerance shall be one-half inch. 
(4)  Base construction. The city engineer shall be notified 24 hours prior to the placing of any of the base material. After the city engineer is satisfied all the equipment necessary for the proper construction of road base is on the proper line, grade and crown, and compacted to the required density, he may authorize the placing of the base material. After the base material has been placed and compacted to the required density the city engineer will check the completed base course. All areas found to be deficient shall be marked and corrected before any asphalt pavement is placed. Areas where the crown is found to exceed that which is specified or the exposed edge of the concrete gutter is less than the minimum depth required, shall be reshaped and rolled to obtain the required cross-section. After the compacted material has been approved, cores shall be taken as directed by the city engineer to determine the thickness of the constructed base course. Areas found to be deficient in thickness shall be corrected as directed by the city engineer. A copy of all delivery tickets for the graded aggregate base material shall be furnished prior to the placing of any asphaltic concrete paving material. A shortage in the base material used shall require that the asphaltic concrete surface course thickness be increased. All work and materials shall be in accordance with the pertinent graded aggregate construction sections of the GDOT "Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges," latest edition. 
(5)  Paving. After the road base has been accepted by the city engineer and upon his approval the contractor shall begin the construction of the asphaltic concrete pavement. All asphaltic concrete material and construction shall be in accordance with the Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction sections of the GDOT "Standard Specifications, Construction of Roads and Bridges," latest edition. After the material has been placed and rolled to the satisfaction of the city engineer, he shall check the cross-section of the finished pavement. Any area found to be deficient shall be marked and a record of deficiencies made by the city engineer. 
(6)  Overlay. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the extent of deficiencies will impair the performance of the pavement, he shall direct that an overlay of a minimum thickness of one inch be placed before the roadway is opened to traffic. A copy of the delivery tickets for the asphaltic concrete material used shall be furnished to the city clerk at the time of completion of the work. If the delivery tickets indicate a shortage in the material used from the quantity estimated the city engineer may require a minimum one inch overlay of the streets. 
(7)  Core tests. Upon acceptance of the surface course by the city engineer, the developer shall have core tests made as directed by the city, to verify the thickness of the street base and asphalt pavement. If these indicate a deficiency in thickness of the street base and asphalt pavement an overlay shall be required when the following deficiencies occur: 
a.  When the number of cores deficient in thickness with the allowable one-quarter of an inch tolerance exceeds 35 percent of the total cores taken on one street. 
b.  When two or more consecutive tests show a deficiency of more than one-quarter of an inch allowable tolerance. When a core shows a deficiency in excess of the allowable tolerance additional cores will be taken to delineate the area of the deficient thickness. 
c.  Any required overlay shall extend a minimum of 150 feet beyond the outer limits of the deficient area for the full width of the street. Smooth, neat joints shall be saw cut normal to the roadway for full depth of asphalt pavement, removing the original pavement overlay. The thickness of the overlay shall be determined by the depth of the deficient area and shall not be less than one inch in compacted thickness. The type of material used in the overlay shall be specified by the county. 
d.  After the paving has been inspected and approved, the pavement edges or behind the curb and gutter shall be backfilled and compacted and the ditches and back slopes properly graded, shaped, seeded and mulched. An 80 percent stand of grass must be obtained. All swales and ditches excavated below required depth shall be backfilled and compacted to 95 percent of maximum dry density. 
Table 20-1  Residential Subdivision Street Development Standards 

 
Table 20-2  Industrial, Commercial/Office Subdivisions and Arterial Roads 

 
(Code 2002, § 17-94; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.24) 
Sec. 20-121. - Construction requirements for industrial and commercial subdivision streets and arterial roads. 
(a)  The design and construction requirements for subdivision developments for industrial, commercial, or office use and streets which are to be city or county arterial roads shall comply with the minimum standards shown on table 20-2, industrial and commercial subdivision streets and arterial roads. Arterial roads shall be required to have concrete curbs and gutters along each side in accordance with county construction standards. 
(b)  All grading, subgrade, base and pavement for industrial commercial land arterial street construction shall be in accordance with section 20-120 and table 20-2. 
(Code 2002, § 17-95; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.25) 
Sec. 20-122. - Improvement to existing streets and rights-of-way. 
Every subdivision shall have frontage on a paved city or county road. The existing roads upon which the subdivision has frontage and access shall be widened, resurfaced or paved to city or county specifications for the full length of the frontage of the subdivision if found necessary due to the existing road being deficient relative to city or county specifications. 
(1)  Existing unpaved road. Any unpaved road upon which a subdivision has frontage and access shall be paved and widened, according to the functional class of the road along the frontage of the subdivision to the nearest intersection with a paved road. The minimum right-of-way required according to section 20-103 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. 
(2)  Existing paved road. Any existing paved city or county road upon which a subdivision has frontage and access and which is deficient relative to city or county specifications shall be resurfaced and widened for the entire frontage of the subdivision. The minimum right-of-way required according to section 20-103 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. 
(Code 2002, § 17-96; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.26) 
Sec. 20-123. - Subdivision access control. 
(a)  Any subdivision that has an entrance onto a state highway, major arterial, minor arterial or collector road shall provide lanes for acceleration/deceleration, ingress and egress. 
(b)  Acceleration and deceleration lanes are required at all entrances to subdivisions and industrial or commercial developments. Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be 12 feet in width plus curb and gutter for a minimum distance of 150 feet with a 75-foot taper for the acceleration lane. Intersection radius must be 20 feet to 30 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 17-97; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.27) 
Sec. 20-124. - Marginal access streets. 
Where a subdivision abuts or includes a major arterial street, marginal access streets may be required to be parallel to and on each side of the major arterial right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the use of the intervening lands for landscaped buffer areas. This design is intended to provide protection for residential properties from local residential traffic. See section 20-120 for alternative design treatment of lots abutting major arterial streets. 
(Code 2002, § 17-98; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.28) 
Sec. 20-125. - Street names. 
(a)  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the streets in which they are in alignment. The names of proposed streets shall not duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the word street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc., in the naming of the street. 
(b)  All proposed street names for new roads or roads within commercial, industrial or residential subdivisions must be approved by the city council during the preliminary plat review process or prior to recording the final plat. Any request to change the name of an existing road just be approved by the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 17-99; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.29) 
Sec. 20-126. - Street signs. 
The chief of police shall determine the need and location of street signs within a subdivision. The location of the street signs shall be determined during the review of the preliminary plat. The standard steel street posts with horizontal reflectorized street name plates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider. 
(Code 2002, § 17-100; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.30) 
Sec. 20-127. - Traffic signs. 
The chief of police shall determine the need and location of traffic signs and street markings within a subdivision during the review of the preliminary plat. Traffic signs shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider in accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
(Code 2002, § 17-101; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.31) 
Sec. 20-128. - House numbers. 
House numbers for subdivision lots shall be assigned by the county building and zoning department prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Code 2002, § 17-102; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.32) 
Sec. 20-129. - Subdivision point of entry signs. 
Signs that are erected on the ground to identify the name and entrance of a residential, commercial or industrial subdivision shall be permitted, provided they are not located and constructed in a manner that creates a traffic hazard. The size and construction of point of entry signs shall comply with the chapter 24, signs. 
(Code 2002, § 17-103; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.33) 
Sec. 20-130. - Street lighting. 
The city council will not accept the streets of a subdivision unless the lighting requirements as set forth in this section are met by the developer. 
(1)  All lighting that is to be a part of the city will be high pressure sodium. 
(2)  Lighting applications: 
a.  Residential overhead. Cobra head fixtures to be mounted on existing poles. Fixtures to be supplied by the power company. Bulbs to be 100 or 150-watt high pressure sodium. 
b.  Residential underground. Decorative post top poles and fixtures unless otherwise specified by the city. Poles and fixtures to be supplied by the power company. Bulbs to be 100 or 150-watt high pressure sodium. Twenty-foot poles with a 16-foot mounting height. 
c.  Commercial land industrial overhead. Cobra head fixtures to be supplied by the power company. Bulbs to be 250 or 400-watt high pressure sodium. 
d.  Commercial and industrial underground. Cobra head fixtures to be mounted on steel poles with minimum mounting height of 30 feet. Poles and fixtures to be supplied by the power company. Bulbs of 250-watt high pressure sodium to be spaced 275 feet apart. Bulbs of 400-watt high pressure sodium to be spaced 325 feet apart. 
(3)  Cut-off fixtures will not be accepted due to the additional number of fixtures needed to light a given distance. 
(4)  Spacing of fixtures in subdivisions will be determined by Georgia Power to provide uniform lighting of roadways. Lights are placed in each cul-de-sac and at the intersection of roadways. Trenching fees charged by the power company are paid by the homeowners of the subdivision or the developer petitioning for lights. 
(5)  After installation of lights, lights will not be removed unless deemed necessary by the city. Additional lights may be requested by homeowners with written approval of the adjacent homeowners affected by the fixtures. 
(6)  Spacing for lighting in subdivisions. 
a.  Overhead fixtures. 300 to 325 feet between fixtures, as allowed by transfer locations. 
b.  Underground fixtures. Minimum of 150 feet, maximum of 2,310 feet between fixtures. 
(7)  All fixtures are to be installed as to provide an adequate clear zone from back of curb. 
(8)  When 50 percent of the lots of a subdivision have been built upon, the developer may petition the city council for acceptance of the subdivision's street lights as an addition to the city's streetlight system. 
(Code 2002, § 17-104; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.34) 
Sec. 20-131. - Street surface drainage specifications. 
The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipes or structures shall be shown on all preliminary plats. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property or through lots in the subdivision shall be extended to at least 30 feet behind the rear of the structure to be located on the lot. Stormwater shall be released into a channel or swale without causing scouring, erosion, or resulting in sedimentation of the receiving channel. The outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to ensure non-erosive velocities of stormwater. All outlet channels should be within drainage easements of sufficient width as shown on the final plat. 
(1)  Installations, backfilling, and compaction around drainage pipes shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications. All pipes shall have a minimum cover of 18 inches from the bottom of the road base, and head walls or inlet basins constructed at the ends of the pipes. 
(2)  All cross drain pipes within public rights-of-way for the purpose of providing storm drainage shall be coated metal pipe, concrete or other material approved by the county. Ninety-five percent compaction shall be required around all pipes. 
(3)  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas. 
(4)  Piped collection systems for public streets (catchbasins, inlets, cross drains, longitudinal piping) shall be designed for the 50-year storm. 
(5)  Road culverts, which carry live streams, and off-site drainage, shall be designed for the 100-year storm. 
(Code 2002, § 17-105; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.35) 
Sec. 20-132. - Storm drainage detention structures on site. 
The city may require on-site storm drainage and detention facilities for any subdivision or commercial or industrial development project. The rate of runoff from any development shall not exceed the rate that existed prior to the development. On-site detention facilities shall be constructed for a 100-year storm, and may include permanent retention basins, underground storage of stormwater, roof system retention, parking lot design for controlled release of stormwater, or other structures approved by the city engineer. Plans for stormwater detention facilities shall be accompanied with stormwater runoff calculations based on recognized formulas, and shall conform to the requirements of generally accepted engineers practice. 
(Code 2002, § 17-106; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.36) 
Sec. 20-133. - Blocks. 
(a)  Layout. Subdivision blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth and length. The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(1)  Zoning requirements for lot sizes and dimensions; 
(2)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(3)  Convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Topographic condition. 
(b)  Length. Blocks shall be neither less than 500 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except where topographic or other conditions of the site make such dimensions impractical. 
(c)  Mid-block pedestrian easements. For blocks over 800 feet in length, the city may require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet wide near the center and entirely across the full width of the block, when necessary for access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(d)  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots with adequate depth relative to the width of lots, except where fronting a major or minor arterial road, or prevented by topographic conditions, or by the size and shape of the property. 
(Code 2002, § 17-107; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.37) 
Sec. 20-134. - Lots. 
Generally, the size, shape, width, depth, orientation, and minimum building setbacks, including the front, side and rear yard lines of lots shall be in accordance chapter 38, zoning. 
(1)  Side lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines. Side lot lines shall be in line with cross drain pipes under streets where they are located. 
(2)  Frontage on public street. Each lot in a subdivision shall front upon a public street or road that is not less than 50 feet in right-of-way width. Each lot must have at least 30 feet of frontage at the property line. 
(3)  Lots on cul-de-sac. Any lot which has frontage on a cul-de-sac turnaround shall have at least 30 feet of frontage at the front property line, and shall have a minimum lot front yard building line setback required by the zoning chapter and the side yard requirements. 
(4)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of at least 15 feet more than required by the zoning chapter for interior lots in a block in order to permit the appropriate building setback from and orientation of both streets upon which the lot has frontage. 
(5)  Through lots. Through lots or double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of the property to be subdivided. Where necessary, a bermed, landscaped planting easement of at least 15 feet in width and four to six feet in height shall be provided across the frontage along the major traffic artery for which there can be no ingress or egress for the affected lots. 
(6)  Flag lots. Flag lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions unless topographic conditions or the shape and orientation of the property to be subdivided make the inclusion of some flag lots necessary. Flag lots must provide minimum frontage requirements as stated in the zoning chapter and are not intended to provide access to other properties so as to circumvent the street and right-of-way requirements of the zoning chapter (ch. 38). Flag lots are intended only to provide use of the rear portion of the extremely deep tracts of land for residential purposes. 
(7)  Large tracts or parcels. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(8)  Public facilities. The subdivider shall connect with public sewer and water facilities to each lot in the development. 
(Code 2002, § 17-108; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.38) 
Sec. 20-135. - Easements and widths. 
(a)  Easements. All lots within a subdivision shall provide easements for stormwater drainage and detention systems, sanitary sewers, and for gas, electric and telephone utilities. 
(b)  Rear lot line easements. Easements along all rear lot lines shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. Ten feet shall be provided on the final plat from each adjoining lot. Wider easements may be required depending on the size, location and depth of proposed or existing sewers. 
(c)  Side lot easements. Easements alongside lot lines shall be a minimum of ten feet wide, five feet along each adjoining lot. Wider easements may be required depending on the size and depth of proposed or existing sewers. 
(d)  Easements along streams and drainageways. Where a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream traverses a subdivision, there shall be provided a stormwater drainage easement or drainage right-of-way along each side of the watercourse for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such easement. The easement shall not be less than 25 feet wide. A wider easement may be required for large streams and drainageways. The easement shall extend from the top of the stream bank at least 12.5 feet away from the stream. (Note: state law prohibits any land-disturbing activity within 24 horizontal feet from the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action.) 
(e)  Minimum lot area and easements. Proposed subdivision lots that are traversed by utility easements for gas, electric, telephone, and water and sewer utilities shall contain the minimum buildable area defined by the zoning district, exclusive of outside areas occupied by these easements. 
(f)  Stormwater detention facility easements. All stormwater detention facilities shall be accessible from a public street by a minimum 20-foot wide easement and there shall be an easement for the detention facility including a minimum of 20 feet around the outside perimeter of the facility. 
(Code 2002, § 17-109; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.39) 
Sec. 20-136. - Permanent reference monuments. 
Materials, size and location: 
(1)  Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms not less than four inches in diameter or square and 42 inches in length shall be set at the extreme corners of subdivisions. 
(2)  Steel pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and 20 inches long shall be set at the following locations: 
a.  All points where street lines intersect the boundary lines. 
b.  All angle points and points of curve on each street. 
c.  All lot corners. 
(3)  Resetting monuments. Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset. 
(Code 2002, § 17-110; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.40) 
Sec. 20-137. - Water distribution systems. 
(a)  Generally. Water mains properly connected with the city water supply system shall be constructed in such a manner so as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both residential use and fire protection. All materials, labor, equipment, and other items related to construction of the water distribution system shall be provided in accordance with city specifications. 
(b)  Extension without subdivisions. The subdivider shall be responsible for the material and labor cost of extending the water systems within the subdivision as directed and inspected by the water and sewer department. 
(1)  The extensions of water mains within the subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate hydraulic capacity for future extensions to the surrounding area and must be connected to existing surrounding water mains to accomplish desirable hydraulic looping. 
(2)  Dead-end mains within a subdivision shall be avoided where practical, as determined by the water and sewer department. Water mains in dead-end streets shall have a fire hydrant installed at the end of the line on a common lot corner. 
(c)  Minimum pipe diameter. Typically, the minimum water main pipe diameter within a subdivision shall be six inches. The need for smaller or larger sized mains shall be determined by the water and sewer department, to ensure adequate water supply and fire protection to the subdivision, and to ensure adequate water flow for future development in the area. 
(d)  Installation. All service lines shall be installed by the developer's contractor according to the water and sewer department's standard detail. 
(e)  Valves. Valves shall be installed to effect a minimum cut-off of mains in cases of emergency shutdown as determined by the water and sewer department. 
(f)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants will be installed so that all residential property within a subdivision will be less than 300 feet from a fire hydrant, with a maximum spacing of 525 feet between hydrants. 
(g)  City design of water mains. The water and sewer department and the state environmental protection division shall approve the design and materials of water mains, and all materials, fittings and accessories for public water systems in a subdivision. 
(h)  Location and depth of water mains. All water mains shall be located at least four feet below finished grade and shall be eight feet in back of the curb line or seven feet from the edge of pavement and within the public street right-of-way. 
(i)  Fire flow requirements. 
(1)  The minimum fire flow and residual pressure for single-family detached houses or duplexes shall be 750 gallons per minute (gpm) at 20 pounds per square inch (psi) residual pressure as required by the state fire marshal. 
(2)  The minimum fire flow for all other types of development shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the water and sewer department and/or fire department. 
(3)  Hydrostatic testing. The water and sewer department shall authorize hydrostatic testing of water mains and hydrants in a subdivision. Leakage testing shall be two hours at 1½ times the system operating pressure. 
(Code 2002, § 17-111; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.41) 
Sec. 20-138. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  Generally. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all lots with connection to the public system. Prior to the submittal of construction plans, the location, size, plans and specifications of the sewer system shall be approved by appropriate city officials, and the state environmental protection division as required. 
(b)  Minimum sewer pipe diameter. All sewer lines within a subdivision shall be at least eight inches in diameter. Larger diameter lines may be required by the water and sewer department where necessary to provide adequate capacity for anticipated development in the immediate area of the subdivision, or to serve the requirements of certain uses within industrial or commercial office subdivisions, or within a planned unit development project. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer pipe diameter. Lateral sewer lines within a subdivision shall include a minimum of four-inch diameter sewer service connection installed for each lot. The service connection shall be extended to the right-of-way and clearly marked with the clean-out extended four feet above finished grade and capped until the lot is developed. 
(d)  Construction drawings. Construction drawing for the sewer system within a subdivision shall be submitted to the water and sewer department for approval. All construction shall be done in accordance with design specifications of the water and sewer department. 
(e)  Certification of drawings. A professional engineer registered in the state shall certify construction drawings. 
(f)  Design. A professional engineer registered in the state shall design the proposed sewer system. The following specifications shall apply: 
(1)  Sewer pipe shall be PVC or ductile iron pipe as per standards and specifications of the water and sewer department. 
(2)  The minimum sewer pipe size shall be eight inches for mains and minimum four inches for stub-outs. 
(3)  All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing full of not less than 2.7 feet per second. All velocity and flow calculations shall be based on the Manning formula using an N value of 0.0013. Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral sewers serving fewer than 30 houses. The sewer shall have a minimum slope of 0.070 percent. Where lateral sewers serve fewer than ten houses, the minimum slope shall not be less than one percent. 
Minimum Slopes for Sewer Size Indicated 

 
(4)  Ductile iron pipe shall be used as follows: 
a.  Where the sewer line crosses drainage structures or open streams; 
b.  For the influent joint of pipe at al drop manholes; 
c.  For outfall sewers at depths less than four feet, and greater than 16 feet; 
d.  For stub-outs at depths of less than five feet. 
(5)  Sewer lines shall be located outside the street, with a minimum 20-foot easement required, with the easement following the centerline of the sewer and designated clearly on the final plat. 
(6)  The minimum depth for sewers shall be seven feet for mains and five feet for stub-outs, or as determined by the water and sewer department. 
(7)  Manholes shall be located not farther than 400 feet apart. Manholes shall be constructed at all turns and grade changes. 
(8)  Sewer lines shall be located within a minimum 20-foot easement when not located within a public right-of-way as provided in subsection (f)(4) of this section. The water and sewer department may require wider easements depending upon the depth and size of the sewer line. 
(9)  The water and sewer department reserves the right to revise the design of any and all sewer lines, and related materials, accessories and fittings within a subdivision. 
(10)  Where it is anticipated that the water and sewer department will extend a trunk or interceptor sewer line adjacent to the subdivision, sewer service lines shall be installed within the subdivision and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connection in the proposed lateral or trunk sewer line at individual lot lines in accordance with the water and sewer department specifications. 
(Code 2002, § 17-112; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.42) 
Sec. 20-139. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Generally. Sidewalks shall be constructed within a single-family residential subdivision on both sides of all streets within the public right-of-way, or at the discretion of the city council, variances may be granted for PUDs with dedicated open spaces. 
(b)  Construction specifications. Sidewalks shall be four feet in width and four inches in thickness and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. Sidewalks shall be installed no closer than two feet to the back of curb line and shall not be constructed over any underground gas, electric, communications, or water and sewer utilities. Sidewalks and curbs, at street intersections, shall be designed to permit handicapped access (see construction standard detail for location of sidewalks.) 
(c)  Installation. Typically, sidewalks shall be installed by the builder before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, all required sidewalks are to be completed by the developer before the end of the two-year maintenance period. Broken curbing and sidewalk after this two-year period will be repaired by the builder before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 2002, § 17-113; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.43) 
Sec. 20-140. - Gas, electric and telecommunications utilities. 
(a)  Responsibility. The subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with Georgia Power and other appropriate utility companies for the installation of utilities to ensure that all lots have adequate services, including cable television. 
(b)  Enforcement. The county building and zoning department shall not issue any occupancy permits for structures in a subdivision or development until all necessary utilities have been installed. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Poles used exclusively for street lighting. 
(2)  Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures owned by a utility company crossing over any portion of an area from which overhead wires are allowed. 
(3)  Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or similar device and extending from one location on the building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any street or right-of-way. 
(4)  Radio antennae and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing communications service. 
(5)  Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric transformer equipment installed aboveground, used to distribute communications service. 
(d)  Electrical transformer substations and lift stations. Transformer substations and sewer lift stations may be required within subdivision developments to serve the proposed developments and a larger area. These facilities shall be fenced with a chain link security fence and shall be landscaped with tree plantings and shrubs. The utility company shall obtain an easement for these installations that shall be clearly indicated on the final plat. 
(Code 2002, § 17-114; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.44) 
Sec. 20-141. - Cemeteries and grave sites. 
Prior to development, where a site contains or borders a cemetery or grave site, the developer shall clearly delineate the area on all site plans and construction drawings. The site shall be enclosed or fenced with a temporary fence or equivalent that allows access but clearly marks the site for protection during construction. In addition, a permanent ten-foot natural or landscaped buffer shall be maintained around the site and shown on the final plat. The site shall also be visibly marked before grading is to begin. 
(Code 2002, § 17-115; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 4.45) 
Secs. 20-142—20-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC DEDICATION AND RESERVATION 

Sec. 20-166. - Public sites; general operation and maintenance. 
Where a site within a tract of land proposed for subdivision is determined to be necessary for a public park, school, fire station, water or sewerage treatment plant, water reservoir, public works yard, or other public facility, the necessary land area shall be reserved or dedicated to the appropriate public authority having jurisdiction over the operation and maintenance of the proposed facility. The final plat for the subdivision shall show these sites as being reserved or dedicated. 
(Code 2002, § 17-141; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 5.01) 
Sec. 20-167. - Dedication. 
When a site is dedicated by a subdivider for public purposes to the appropriate authority, the land shall be transferred by a deed and dedication plat and recorded by the clerk of superior court following acceptance: 
(1)  Park and recreation sites shall be first recommended by the developer prior to action for acceptance of dedication of the site by the city council. 
(2)  The board of education shall review the location and need for the school sites, and decide whether or not to accept dedication of a site within 90 days of receipt of a preliminary plan. The board of education shall consult with the city council for recommendation on school sites. If the board of education decides to accept dedication of the site for a school, it shall notify the city council. The city council shall then direct the city clerk to have the deed and dedication plat recorded by the clerk of superior court. 
(3)  Land dedication for fire or police stations, public buildings, rights-of-way, and other public works shall be transferred by the subdivider to the city by a deed and dedication plat and recorded by the clerk of superior court, following acceptance by the city council. 
(4)  Land dedicated for streets, water and sewage easements, drainage easements and other facilities under jurisdiction of the city shall be recorded following acceptance by the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 17-142; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 5.02) 
Sec. 20-168. - Reservation. 
(a)  When a site is determined necessary for public purposes by the appropriate authorities, and the subdivider elects to reserve rather than dedicate the site, then it shall be reserved for public purposes. The subdivider shall allow a period of two years from the date of preliminary plat and construction improvements plan approval, during which time the appropriate city authorities may authorize and complete the purchase of the site. 
(b)  During the two-year period for which the appropriate authorities have to acquire the reserved site for public purposes, the subdivider may proceed with the necessary approvals, for subdivision of the remainder of the development of the reserved tract. 
(Code 2002, § 17-143; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 5.03) 
Secs. 20-169—20-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 

Sec. 20-190. - Preconstruction review and approval. 
(a)  All subdivisions and development projects shall construct and install all improvements in accordance with the requirements of article IV of this chapter. The steps for preconstruction review and approval and required inspections shall be followed as indicated below. 
(b)  Prior to beginning development of the subdivision, the subdivider shall first obtain the following approvals: 
(1)  Preliminary plan approval required. The subdivider must first have a preliminary subdivision plan approved by the city. 
(2)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The subdivider must have a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, which shall be reviewed by the city engineer. No development permit shall be issued for any development that does not have an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(3)  Preconstruction conference. Prior to the issuing of a development permit, the city clerk shall contact the developer for a preconstruction conference. The preconstruction conference shall include a review of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, street cross-sections and profiles, construction specifications, procedures for inspections and testing, stormwater drainage and detention facilities, water/sewer service, and any other matters concerning the development. The subdivider shall provide a list of names, telephone numbers, addresses and business license numbers of all contractors and subcontractors employed on a job. 
(4)  Development permit required. The city clerk shall issue a development permit only after the approval of the construction improvements plan and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. Site grading shall be limited only to those areas clearly defined on the approved plans. Any site grading which is done without an approved soil erosion control plan and development permit is a violation of this article and shall result in enforcement penalties as provided by article VIII of this chapter. Instances where grading has occurred prior to issuance of a development permit, or when grading has exceeded the area approved according to the approved plans and development permit, the permit fee amount shall be doubled. Any violations of the conditions or limitations imposed by the development permit shall also be subject to penalties provided by article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 17-161; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 6.01) 
Sec. 20-191. - Inspection procedures. 
The subdivider is responsible for making requests for inspections before beginning any of the stages indicated below. No grading shall commence without an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and a development permit. Soil erosion prevention measures shall be installed prior to grading. 
(1)  Inspection notification. The subdivider shall notify the city clerk at least 24 hours before any stage of construction begins. If construction during any phase is stopped or delayed due to inclement weather or other reasons, the subdivider shall notify the city clerk 24 hours before commencing construction activity again. 
(2)  Clearing and grubbing. After providing the required notice to the city clerk, clearing of the right-of-way may begin. All work is to be in accordance with section 20-120. 
(3)  Street grading. Following inspection and approval of the street clearing and grubbing by the city engineer and after street grade stakes have been set by the project's engineer, the contractor may proceed with the grading of the streets. All work is to be in accordance with section 20-120. Compaction tests shall be made as required by the city engineer to determine that the required 95 percent maximum dry density is being achieved. At least one test shall be made over each storm drain pipe when it has been covered with 18 inches of backfill material. 
(4)  Subgrade compaction. Following the completion and approval of the street grading and installation of curb and gutter, the contractor may proceed with the preparation of the subgrade in accordance with section 20-120. Compaction tests shall be made at the direction of the city engineer to determine that the required minimum of 90 percent maximum dry density is being achieved. 
(5)  Curb and gutter. Following the installation of all proposed sanitary sewer and water lines and acceptance of the street grading, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the curb and gutter. All work and materials shall be in accordance with section 20-120. 
(6)  Base preparation. After the street subgrade has been inspected and approved, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the street pavement base. All work and materials shall be in accordance with section 20-120 and table 20-1 or table 20-2. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the city engineer to ensure that the required minimum of 90 percent maximum dry density has been achieved. Cores shall be taken as directed by the city engineer to determine the constructed thickness of the base course. 
(7)  Paving. After the road base has been approved and accepted by the city engineer, the contractor may proceed with the construction of the asphaltic concrete binder and/or surface courses. All work and materials shall be in accordance with section 20-120 and tables 4-1 and 4-2 of this article. Compaction tests shall be made as directed by the city engineer to ensure that the required minimum of 90 percent maximum has been achieved. 
(8)  Street core tests. Street core test results shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to the recording of a final subdivision plat. These cores shall be taken as directed by the city engineer immediately upon completion of the surface course. Refer to section 20-120. 
(9)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control. During all of the stages of inspection, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be inspected. The subdivision shall be subject to soil erosion and sedimentation control inspection at any other times determined necessary to ensure compliance with the approved plan. The subdivider is responsible for continued maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required. 
(10)  Work stoppage. A stop work order may be issued at any time if it is determined to be necessary due to failure of the subdivider to comply with any of the requirements of this article or the zoning chapter. A stop work notice shall be posted on the site and the subdivider shall be notified in writing concerning the reasons for the stop work order. Any work that proceeds in violation of a stop order shall subject the subdivider to penalties as prescribed in section 20-250. 
(11)  Work delays. If construction during any phase of development is delayed due to inclement weather or for other reasons, the subdivider shall notify the city clerk prior to resuming construction activities. 
(Code 2002, § 17-162; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 6.02) 
Sec. 20-192. - Minimum inspection requirements. 
The following inspections shall be made and documented by the city engineer: 
(1)  Street improvement. 
a.  Check results of subgrade, base and embankment compaction tests. 
b.  Test rolling of the finished subgrade and base course shall be accomplished using a three axle tandem axle truck with a minimum gross weight of 15 tons. Rolling shall be performed as directed by the city engineer. 
c.  Inspect for compaction around all drainage pipes and drainage structures. 
d.  Inspect and document the alignment and condition of curb and gutter. 
e.  Check fill material before authorizing use. 
f.  Inspect and document the placement of asphalt pavement. Check core testing results. 
g.  Obtain from the subdivider all records of asphalt mix and materials quantities. 
h.  Require as-graded street profiles and review for compliance to the approved construction plans prior to installing any curb and gutter or base material. 
(2)  Storm drainage improvements. 
a.  Inspect cross drain pipes to ensure that metal pipe is properly coated and sized according to plans. 
b.  Reject any defective pipe and ensure it is not used on the job. 
c.  Observe pipe-laying operation to ensure that pipes are true to line and grade, properly located, and bedding and backfill is compacted according to specifications. Document the depth, the type of bedding, trench conditions and backfilling operations. 
d.  Inspect rip-rap or concrete headwalls for proper installation. Ensure that drainage catchbasins and manholes are installed properly. 
e.  Inspect drainage ditches within the street right-of-way and drainage easements within the subdivision to ensure proper embankment slope and grade according to specifications. 
f.  For enclosed storm drainage systems, inspect to ensure that pipes are true to line and grade. Storm drain sewer pipes on steep slopes, greater than 12 percent, should be checked to see that they are properly anchored. Inspect pipe materials and document pipe manufacturer, class and size. Pipe materials for storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete, asphalt coated corrugated steel or other approved materials. Inspect to ensure that sewers are laid with uniform slope between structures and have straight alignments between structures. 
g.  Inspect stormwater detention facilities to ensure compliance with approved plans, capacity volumes and city construction standards. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer and water main improvements. The city engineer shall: 
a.  Inspect pipe material, manufacturer, class and size for conformance with water and sewer authority specifications. 
b.  Reject any defective materials to ensure that they will not be used on the job. 
c.  Observe pipe laying operation to ensure that all joints are properly made, pipes are true to line and grade, compaction and backfill are done according to specifications. 
d.  Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, compaction, the location of all service stub-outs and connections, backfilling and location of all utilities. 
e.  Perform and document all final acceptance testing. 
(Code 2002, § 17-163; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 6.03) 
Sec. 20-193. - Developer's responsibilities. 
(a)  Generally. The subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining documentation of all construction activity. It is recommended that the subdivider retain a professional engineer to supervise, document and inspect all construction of the subdivision. 
(b)  Construction materials records. The subdivider shall maintain all records of all construction materials and quantities used to construct the roads for the subdivision. Asphalt tickets and other material records shall be made available to the city clerk when requested. 
(Code 2002, § 17-164; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 6.04) 
Secs. 20-194—20-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-225. - Administration. 
The city clerk shall administer the process for subdivision plat approval. The city engineer shall: 
(1)  Receive and review all subdivision plats for conformity with the provisions of this article and the zoning chapter. 
(2)  Modify or reject any plats that fail to conform to the zoning and development ordinances and make recommendations for improving the layout and design of subdivisions. 
(Code 2002, § 17-191; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 7.01) 
Sec. 20-226. - Enforcement. 
The city council may authorize enforcement action if the subdivider, or any contractor or subcontractor employed by the subdivider, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 17-192; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 7.02) 
Sec. 20-227. - Penalties for violation. 
Violations of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards in connection with grants of variances shall, upon conviction, be punishable according to the general penalties provision of this Code.. In addition, the violator may be required to pay any court costs which lawfully may be imposed. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking other legal action as determined necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2002, § 17-193; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 7.03) 
Sec. 20-228. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize a variance after notice and a public hearing where it can be shown that the application of any regulation of this article would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, or where, because of topographical or other conditions unique to the property would create practical difficulty in its development. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the legal organ of the county at least 15 days prior thereto stating the date, time and location of the hearing, the applicant's name, the location of the development and the nature of the variance sought. 
(Code 2002, § 17-194; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 7.04) 
Secs. 20-229—20-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 20-250. - Appeal provisions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, any final decision on the interpretation or enforcement hereof shall be placed in writing by the city clerk and served upon the developer. If the developer is not also the owner of the property, a copy also shall be served on the property owner. Service shall be deemed effective if mailed to the developer/owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the address shown in the application for plan approvals/permits. 
(b)  Any appeal from a decision made by the city council shall be presented in writing to the city clerk within 30 days of receipt of final action by the city council. The city clerk shall immediately forward a copy of the appeal to the mayor and council. An appeal shall be scheduled at the next regular meeting of the city council if practical, but no later than 21 days from the date of the appeal. Decision of mayor and council shall be final action by the city, subject to review upon writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county. 
(Code 2002, § 17-213; Ord. of 4-11-2005(3), § 8.03) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crime generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 

Sec. 22-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of disorderly conduct. A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation uses, to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words, which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment (such words being commonly called "fighting words"); or, without provocation, uses obscene or vulgar or profane language in the present of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; 
(4)  Public intoxication. Any person who is drunk or under the influence of liquor, wine or beer or any other alcoholic beverage or any narcotic drug on the streets or in any public place or building or any assembly of people or on private property other than that of such drunk or intoxicated person; 
(5)  Indecent language. Use of indecent, profane or vulgar language by any person on the streets or in any other public place or in any public gathering; 
(6)  Inappropriate congregation. Assemblage or congregation for the purpose of violating or with the intent to violate the gaming, alcoholic beverages or narcotics laws of this state and to do any act pursuant thereof; 
(7)  Illegal/fraudulent schemes, etc. Any person who frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from any other person by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(8)  Deliberate obstruction of the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. The congregation of people with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and to refuse to clear such way when ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; or 
(9)  Property damage. The act by any person in a violent or tumultuous manner towards another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-2. - Disorderly house. 
No person shall keep, maintain or allow, either alone or with others, a disorderly house whereby riotous and/or boisterous persons assemble in such a manner that causes the annoyance of the citizens of the city; or, where gaming, drinking or other misbehavior results in the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-2) 
State Law reference— Disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 22-3. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the county, or within any public building; unless, such activity is specifically authorized by separate ordinance, license or permit. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-3) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 22-4. - Possession of open container of alcohol or misdemeanor possession of marijuana in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of alcohol in any public area or be in possession of marijuana in such an amount as to constitute a misdemeanor (i.e., less than one ounce) anywhere in the county. There may be authorized exceptions that may allow for the possession of open containers of alcohol as set forth by separate ordinance, license or permit. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-4) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to possess or distribute controlled substance, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30; jurisdiction of municipal courts in marijuana possession cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6; use of marijuana for treatment of cancer and glaucoma, O.C.G.A. § 43-34-120 et seq. 
Sec. 22-5. - Possession of alcohol by person under the age of 21 years. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess any alcohol. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-5) 
State Law reference— Alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 22-6. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand, remain idle, prowling either alone and/or in consort with others, in a public place in such manner as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding, or tend to hinder or impede, the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon, facing, or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto. 
(3)  Be in a place or location at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that results in a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  A failure to comply with the orders and directions of law enforcement officers shall also constitute a violation of this section. Specifically, when any law enforcement officer shall order/direct any person to stop causing or committing such conditions that constitute loitering and/or prowling and to move on or disperse, then if said person fails or refuses to obey such orders then said person shall be guilty of violating this section. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-6) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 22-7. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended any vehicle of any type on any street, road, alley, or on/in any other public area for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned or otherwise left unattended. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-7) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 22-8. - Simple assault. 
A person commits the offense of simple assault when he either: 
(1)  Attempts to commit a violent injury to the person of another; or 
(2)  Commits an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-8) 
State Law reference— Simple assault, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20. 
Sec. 22-9. - Simple battery. 
A person commits the offense of simple battery when he either: 
(1)  Intentionally makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with the person of another; or 
(2)  Intentionally causes physical harm to another. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-9) 
State Law reference— Simple battery, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-23. 
Sec. 22-10. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is $500.00 or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he knowingly and without authority: 
(1)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3)  Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad, car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor who is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally defaces, mutilates, or defiles any grave marker, monument, or memorial to one or more deceased person who served in the military service of this state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof, or a monument, plaque, marker, or memorial which is dedicated to, honors, or recounts the military service of any past or present military personnel of this state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof if such grave marker, monument, memorial, plaque, or marker is privately owned or located on land which is privately owned. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-10) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 22-11. - Misdemeanor shoplifting, theft and theft of services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either alone or in concert with another or others, to appropriate any merchandise or item from any establishment, building or residence that has a value of less than $500.00, without first paying for the merchandise/item; or, to otherwise deprive the owner of said merchandise/item without having first paid the value for said merchandise/item. It shall be further unlawful for any person to alter the sales price for any merchandise or item with the intention of obtaining said merchandise/item for less than the listed sales price. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful for any person to obtain services, accommodations, entertainment, the use of personal property, or utilities through deception or with the intent to avoid payment for said service that is/are of a value of less than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-11) 
State Law reference— Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Sec. 22-12. - False reports of crimes and false alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to file or make any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report alleging the commission of any crime or violation or the occurrence of any emergency. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-12) 
State Law reference— False report of a crime, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26. 
Sec. 22-13. - Obstruction of law enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder or interfere with the lawful discharge of the duties of law enforcement. Such obstruction, hindrance or interference shall include the giving of false or misleading information to law enforcement including, but not limited to, the giving of a false name, address or date of birth. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-13) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 22-14. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the genitals; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another; 
(5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(6)  Urination or defecation; or 
(7)  Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. 
(1)  As to the offenses enumerated in subsection (a)(1) through (6) of this section, a citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $350.00 in the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities. 
(2)  As to the offenses enumerated in subsection (a)(7) of this section, a citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 in the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court approved community service activities. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014, § 1(18-13)) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 22-15. - Permitting or contributing to the delinquency of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, counsel, advise, encourage or assist any minor under the age of 18 to be or become delinquent, loiter, or engage in any illegal or unlawful activity including the purchase or possession of alcohol or drugs. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-14) 
State Law reference— Contributing to delinquency, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-1. 
Sec. 22-16. - Curfew for minors and exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of amusement, public eating places, vacant lots, or any other place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the curfew hours shall be between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; except, for the exemptions in subsection (b) of this section: 
(b)  Exceptions/exemptions to the hours of curfew set forth in this section shall include: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is assisting with an emergency at the direction of a parent or guardian or other adult having the lawful care and custody of said minor; 
(3)  When the minor is in the process of returning directly home from lawful employment; returning home from school functions or extra-curricular activities, including, but not limited to, sporting events, band activities and dances; or returning home from other activities involving the exercise of First Amendment rights or any other fundamental rights such as events to related religious organizations; or 
(4)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for travel purposes, including interstate travel, that involves travel through city. 
(c)  It shall be considered a violation of this curfew section for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years to permit, directly or indirectly, or otherwise allow (including by virtue of insufficient supervision and control) such minor to be in violation of this section 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-15) 
Sec. 22-17. - Penalties. 
Sections 22-1 through this section are considered city ordinances and violations of said ordinances are deemed misdemeanor violations. The penalties for any such violation shall be in accordance with the general penalties provision of this Code. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in the county jail. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2014(2), § 18-16) 
Chapter 24 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Authorization and intent. 
The public has a legitimate interest and concern in the construction, maintenance, and regulation of outdoor advertising within the city and it is therefore desirable to describe the manner of construction, compel the use of safe materials, limit size, length, height, and location with reference to streets; require clean and sanitary maintenance; and prohibit illegal advertisement pursuant to and in the exercise of the public health, safety, and welfare powers of the city. It is the intent of the mayor and council to provide hereby the basis for regulation of such outdoor advertising consistent with the foregoing purposes and thereby regulate such advertising affixed to real property which is visible from any public right-of-way in order to promote public health, safety, traffic safety, welfare, and to protect aesthetic values and qualities in the city. The mayor and council so act, finding and understanding that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages, but that left completely unregulated, signs may also become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this chapter, the mayor and council intend to balance the rights of individuals to convey messages through signs and the rights of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-2)) 
Sec. 24-2. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  The requirements of this chapter shall govern all signs located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any area which is annexed into or incorporated within the corporate limits of the city shall, on the effective date of annexation, be subject to all provisions of this chapter. Any such annexed area shall be subject to and be governed by the signage requirements of the use zone within the city which is specified in the ordinance adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-3)) 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. The term "animated sign" includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six hours is not considered an animated sign. However, any deviation from the minimum six-hour change of unchanged copy results in the sign being considered an animated sign. 
Area of a sign/sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Billboard sign means any sign with a sign area exceeding 300 square feet. 
Commercial sign means a sign which identifies, advertises or directs attention to a business, or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property or service, including, without limitation, any sign naming a brand of goods or service and real estate signs. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Flag means any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used to signify a government or other entity or organization. 
Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Mobile sign means a sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle, whether motorized or drawn, which is placed, parked or maintained at one particular location for the express purpose and intent of promotion, or conveying an advertising message. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter that was legal at the time of its erection. 
Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Portable sign means a sign that is constructed of any material that may be moved from one location to another, whether or not it is fastened to an object, building or staked to the ground in any manner at any given time. 
Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. 
Sign means a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Stanchion sign means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-4)) 
Secs. 24-4—24-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 24-25. - Issuance requirements and standards. 
(a)  All signs allowed by this article, except those exempted from obtaining a permit shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting a sign in the city. 
(b)  Existing signs which conform to the provisions of this article that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this article must register with the city within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 24-26. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(c)  For all approved permits and registrations required pursuant to this section, the city shall supply, and the sign applicant shall adhere to the sign, a permit sticker which shall contain such information concerning the registration as shall be deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-5)) 
Sec. 24-26. - Application information. 
Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the city clerk. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures, including existing signage and which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
(3)  The names and addresses of all of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  Name, address, phone number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
(7)  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-6)) 
Sec. 24-27. - Time for consideration. 
The city shall process all sign permit applications within 45 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by first class mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 45 business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-7)) 
Sec. 24-28. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, are incomplete applications, or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the clerk shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by first class mail or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city. The applicant will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council upon filing of written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the hearing officer's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of five full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of council thereafter. The council shall make a final decision no later than 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Petition. In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-8)) 
Sec. 24-29. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed in accordance with the permit application within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-9)) 
Sec. 24-30. - Fees. 
The cost of a permit shall be as determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-10)) 
Secs. 24-31—24-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 24-49. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs; 
(2)  Animated signs; 
(3)  Mobile signs; 
(4)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(5)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area; 
(6)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80; 
(7)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign; 
(8)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; 
(9)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; and 
(10)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-11)) 
Sec. 24-50. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 24-51, parcels located in residential zoning districts shall be allowed sign or signs containing non-commercial speech not exceeding, either per sign or in aggregate, a total of 15 square feet per lot. Any such sign shall also have a maximum height of five feet and be set back at least five feet from any right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, the term "non-commercial speech" shall mean any message which does not meet the definition of a commercial sign. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-12)) 
Sec. 24-51. - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five feet above the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 25 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-13)) 
Sec. 24-52. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be applicable to signs located in nonresidential zoning districts: 
(1)  No stanchion sign shall exceed 24 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the centerline of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-14)) 
Sec. 24-53. - General size and location requirements in nonresidential districts. 
(a)  No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(b)  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 672 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed 14 feet in height or 48 feet in length. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500 foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(7)  No billboard sign shall be erected to a height in excess of 50 feet. 
(d)  Stanchion signs. 
(1)  Stanchion signs for parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet. 
(2)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three acres but equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet shall not exceed a sign area of 90 square feet. 
(3)  Stanchion signs for parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall not exceed a sign area of 70 square feet. 
(4)  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(e)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure, and shall be limited to one such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(f)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 300 square feet or ten percent of the wall face of the premises to which the sign relates, whichever is less, on each street facing wall. 
(4)  The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be ten feet. 
(5)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(6)  Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall or awning sign on each street facing wall. 
(g)  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one freestanding sign, provided that: 
(1)  Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 300 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(2)  Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 180 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(3)  Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of 100 square feet for the entire parcel. 
(4)  These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs, window signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(5)  These limits shall include the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-15)) 
Sec. 24-54. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this article shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this article that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 60 days. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-16)) 
Sec. 24-55. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived the owner of the nonconforming sign or the owner's agent registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in section 28-26 and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign; however, failure to register shall be considered an offense and may be punished as any other ordinance violation. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign, provided that signs damaged by an act of God and not due to the owner's action may be restored to their pre-damaged condition, provided that the useful life of the signs is not extended. 
(b)  No structural repairs except those permitted pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-17)) 
Sec. 24-56. - Variances. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
b.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(2)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the city council and shall be heard under the same time frames and rules governing appeals under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-18)) 
Sec. 24-57. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
(a)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of article II of this chapter and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 24-51(g)(1) through (3): 
(1)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window space. 
(2)  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying property location and not exceeding four inches in height in residential districts and ten inches in height in nonresidential districts. 
(3)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right of way that are erected for a maximum period of 30 days no more than twice a year. 
(b)  Every parcel may display no more than two flags that shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided herein without obtaining a permit. Flagpoles in residential zoned districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed 60 feet in height. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 50 percent of the vertical height. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-19)) 
Sec. 24-58. - Illumination. 
Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. Illumination shall be constant and shall not change, flash, scroll or stimulate movement. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-20)) 
Sec. 24-59. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this article by any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be liable for a fine of $150.00 for each violation. Each day a sign is posted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2012, § 1(20-21)) 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 26-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 2002, § 22-1; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-101) 
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use or pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination of such acts. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 2002, § 22-2; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-102) 
Sec. 26-3. - Enforcement of chapter provisions. 
(a)  Generally. The director of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of solid waste management duties, the director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the director of public works shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 2002, § 22-3; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-103) 
Sec. 26-4. - Precollection. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this section or under the express prior approval of the director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove the accumulation. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject to penalties set forth in this chapter. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Containers. 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 35 gallons, except that bulk containers of a type accepted by the director of public works as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with the provisions of this subsection or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(2)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(3)  Commercial establishments may provide an approved dumpster or other collection device (designed to be removed by a private or public scavenger) or other type of bulk container of a type accepted by equipment used for mechanical collection. 
(c)  Rubbish. Rubbish may be stored for collection in paperboard boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste. Loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cuttings shall not exceed four inches in diameter nor four feet in length. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. 
(d)  Placement. On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the director of public works, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning the same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(f)  Predisposal. Any commercial establishment engaged in the sale of food shall separate all putrescible wastes from rubbish and refuse and place the same in an approved dumpster. Such putrescible wastes shall be then conveyed to an approved landfill by the owner of the such commercial establishment or by a city-approved scavenger. 
(Code 2002, § 22-4; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-104; Ord. of 7-8-1986, § 12-104) 
Sec. 26-5. - Collection. 
(a)  Frequency. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected on such schedules as the mayor and council shall determine. 
(b)  Limitations. Industrial waste, dead animals, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will not be collected, transported, or disposed of by public facilities; but such waste collection, transportation, and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. It shall be a violation of this section to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the director of public works. 
(c)  Collection vehicles. Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters, not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(d)  Private contractors. The city may enter into such agreements for the collection of waste by private contractors on such terms and conditions as they see fit, provided that the contract does not exceed one year in duration and does not violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 22-5; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-105) 
Sec. 26-6. - Fees; charges for public collection and disposal. 
Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be as determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 22-6; Ord. of 4-8-1985, § 12-107) 
Chapter 28 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION 

Sec. 28-19. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk (ex officio treasurer, tax receiver, tax collector) shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in this section. To the extent this article fails to provide a designated procedure, the officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. 
(b)  In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as finally determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)  Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the mayor and council shall, by resolution, adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to adoption of such millage rate, the mayor and council shall publish the notice of proposed ad valorem tax rate as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
(d)  The city clerk shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the county tax digest by regular U.S. mail with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, that failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100 percent) and its taxable value (40 percent of fair market value), and the amount of tax due thereon. The bill shall also state the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 24-31; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.1) 
Sec. 28-20. - Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date set forth in the article imposing the tax or assessment. 
(b)  All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States. Except where specially authorized by the mayor and council, no partial payments shall be accepted. 
(c)  Taxes and special assessments shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The city clerk may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever, or to the extent that, he reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his department. 
(Code 2002, § 24-32; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.2) 
State Law reference— Payment of taxes, interest, etc., O.C.G.A. § 48-5-24. 
Sec. 28-21. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  All penalties imposed by this article are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(b)  In any instance in which any taxpayer fails to pay a tax or assessment within 90 days of the due date, he shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest as specified in this article. 
(c)  The mayor and council may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this article to the extent such body finds and determines the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 24-33; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.3) 
Sec. 28-22. - Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. 
(a)  As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the city clerk shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days, an execution shall be issued. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions for the nonpayment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi.fa. (taxpayer), the years for which delinquent taxes are being executed and the amount. Executions shall be directed to all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state. 
(c)  The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be recorded on the general execution docket of the county where the property is located, in the case of real property and, in the case of personal property, in the county of the taxpayer's residence if a resident of the state, otherwise in the county where any real or personal property of the taxpayer may be found. If the taxpayer is not a resident of the state and has no known real or personal property within the state, the execution shall be recorded in the county in which the act or activity giving rise to tax liability took place. 
(d)  All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this article for past due taxes and assessments. 
(e)  The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be placed in the hands of the city marshal for collection or levy and sale of property. The marshal shall exercise his best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi.fa. If he is unable to do so, the marshal shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the defendant in fi.fa.'s property, whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2002, § 24-34; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.4) 
Sec. 28-23. - Levy of executions; sale of property. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby designated as the marshal of the city and he, or his designee, is delegated the duties set forth in this article. The marshal shall be subject to being ruled for money in his hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the municipality. After first paying the city clerk the amount due on the process under which the sale was made, the marshal or his designee shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi.fa. 
(b)  In all cases of levying on real property, within five days, written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi.fa. and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the city clerk shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi.fa. therein. 
(c)  Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessments, it shall be the duty of the marshal or his designee before proceeding to advertise the property for sale to give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the record owner of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner of the land, the years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of the taxes due, together with accrued costs. The marshal shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where and to whom the notice was delivered. The marshal shall file the copy with the city clerk. 
(d)  When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the marshal or his designee in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, that in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi.fa. shall be given at least ten days' written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be addressed to the taxpayer at the last known address listed in the records of the county tax commissioner. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the marshal or his designee shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e)  The marshal or his designee shall publish weekly for four weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the names of the owners of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the city and the years for which taxes have been executed. 
(f)  Sales of property under execution shall be made by the marshal or his designee before the city hall on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, whichever is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, that should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day or Independence Day, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions, and neither the person conducting the sale, nor the city, make any representations or warranty of title, condition or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. 
(g)  The marshal or his designee shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash and, upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the marshal or his designee to do so, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the marshal or his designee either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this article, shall convey the title as effectual as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final. Real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi.fa. or any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy and sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited in the instrument. The marshal or his designee shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold; provided, however, that the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. 
(h)  Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property sold for taxes after the property has been offered for a reasonable time, the marshal or his designee may either readvertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The marshal or his designee shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
(Code 2002, § 24-35; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.5) 
Sec. 28-24. - Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. 
(a)  If, during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered for a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county, and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the city's cost due on the sale, then the city clerk, or his designee, may purchase the property for the city. If the city purchases property at a sale, the marshal or his designee shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city clerk. The marshal shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. 
(b)  Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder; however, when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided in section 28-27. 
(c)  The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth in section 28-27. 
(Code 2002, § 24-36; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.6) 
Sec. 28-25. - Accounting by marshal; final return or settlement. 
(a)  The marshal or his designee shall make a prompt accounting to the city clerk for all executions placed in his hands for collection or levy and sale. He shall pay over to the clerk all amounts due the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties and costs, and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs and all expenses of a sale, it shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. 
(b)  In any event, if, within 90 days from the date executions are placed in his hands, the marshal or his designee finds an execution to be either uncollectible or not collectible in full, he shall so notify the city clerk in writing. It shall be the duty of the clerk to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket of the county upon their final payment or collection. 
(Code 2002, § 24-37; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.7) 
Sec. 28-26. - Garnishments by city; reduction of executions to judgment. 
(a)  Whenever the marshal or his designee can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi.fa. on which to levy any tax execution in his hands, he shall make an entry to that effect on the execution. The city clerk, in the name of the city, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi.fa. or who has property, money or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi.fa. The clerk shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. 
(b)  When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of nulla bona has been duly entered on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period, and the city clerk has reason to believe the defendant in fi.fa. may have or may come into ownership of assets outside the state, the clerk, in the name of the city, may petition the county superior court in this state in which the defendant in fi.fa. maintains a known residence, place of business or agent to receive service, to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi.fa. does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2002, § 24-38; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.8) 
Sec. 28-27. - Redemption rights of defendant in fi.fa.; vesting of title in grantee. 
(a)  Whenever real property is sold for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi.fa. or any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-42, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-45, which code sections by reference are incorporated in this section as a part of this article. 
(b)  Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a tax sale has not been given as required in subsection (a) of this section, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed in the county where the property is situated, provided that the defendant in fi.fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. If the defendant in fi.fa. is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
(Code 2002, § 24-39; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.9) 
Sec. 28-28. - Costs. 
(a)  For issuing executions, the city shall receive only an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the clerk of superior court for recording and cancellation of the tax fi.fa. 
(b)  Once a levy is made or posted on the property of a defendant in fi.fa., in addition to all taxes, interest, penalties and costs heretofore accrued, the city shall collect a levy administration fee of five percent of the taxes due or $250.00, whichever is the lesser; however, no levy administration fee shall be less than $50.00. 
(c)  In addition to the levy administration fee, the city shall collect its actual cost for advertising the sale, postage and service fees actually incurred, and any attorney's fees incurred in examination of title to property. 
(d)  The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as a part of the redemption price. 
(Code 2002, § 24-40; Ord. of 5-14-2001(4), § 30.2.10) 
Secs. 28-29—28-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 28-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Warm Springs and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Warm Springs or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method of payment. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means a calendar month of the year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint-stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-71)) 
Sec. 28-61. - Tax rate. 
Under authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3), there shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-72)) 
Sec. 28-62. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under this article. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-73)) 
Sec. 28-63. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and this state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-74)) 
Sec. 28-64. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance from which this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-75)) 
Sec. 28-65. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-76)) 
Sec. 28-66. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 28-65. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-77)) 
Sec. 28-67. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 28-66(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 28-65. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-78)) 
Sec. 28-68. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action within 60 days of the date said written claim is filed. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-79)) 
Sec. 28-69. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc; form. Every lodging provider renting guestrooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guestrooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-80)) 
Sec. 28-70. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 28-62 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the county for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 28-65 to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. of 1-18-2011, § 1(24-81)) 
Secs. 28-71—28-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE LICENSE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local fees upon insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 

Sec. 28-99. - Levy of annual fee. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount established from time to time by the mayor and council. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 28-100, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount established from time to time by the mayor and council. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 2002, § 10-81; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 28-100. - Fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing, and, in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location as established from time to time by the mayor and council for each year. 
(Code 2002, § 10-82; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 28-101. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 28-99 in the amount established from time to time by the mayor and council for each such location within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 10-83; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 28-102. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 28-99. 
(Code 2002, § 10-84; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 28-103. - Gross premiums tax for all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 28-99. 
(Code 2002, § 10-85; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 5) 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 28-104. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 28-99 and 28-100 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 2002, § 10-86; Ord. of 11-14-1994, § 6) 
Chapter 30 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal franchise powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; cable service or video franchise options, franchise agreement negotiations, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-3; Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC section 521 et seq.; agreements between counties and municipalities as to franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding payment for telecommunication services, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE SERVICE OR CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISE 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable service means cable service as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). If cable service is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable service" shall mean cable service as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or its renewal, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorized the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services, or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
Street means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. The term "telecommunications services" includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
(Code 2002, § 26-31; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-1) 
Sec. 30-20. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article, and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The mayor and council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the mayor and council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the mayor and council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals. 
(Code 2002, § 26-32; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-2) 
Sec. 30-21. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the mayor and council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security Number; copy of the applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The name and the residence and business address of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The name, residence, and business address of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The name and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant, in whole or in part, or owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity including, but not limited to, telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the mayor and council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchises awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchises with respect to their completion; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication systems; and the amount of the applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including, but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the mayor and council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Code 2002, § 26-33; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-3) 
Sec. 30-22. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
(a)  Generally. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(b)  Purpose of fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
(c)  Furnishing by applicant. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as shall be determined by the mayor and council from time to time, by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(Code 2002, § 26-34; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-4) 
Sec. 30-23. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 2002, § 26-35; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-5) 
Sec. 30-24. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the mayor and council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Code 2002, § 26-36; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-6) 
Sec. 30-25. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination under this article as to any application for a franchise, the mayor and council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Code 2002, § 26-37; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-7) 
Sec. 30-26. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the mayor and council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the mayor and council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the mayor and council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the mayor and council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the mayor and council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the mayor and council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The mayor and council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the mayor and council, the mayor and council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interest of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Code 2002, § 26-38; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-8) 
Sec. 30-27. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Code 2002, § 26-39; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-9) 
Sec. 30-28. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the mayor and council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The mayor and council may also establish and appoint one or more advisor boards, with such duration and such number of members as the mayor and council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 26-40; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-11) 
Sec. 30-29. - Retroactive application of article provisions. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services and other telecommunications services existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 2002, § 26-41; Ord. of 5-14-2001(2), § 10-7-12) 
Sec. 30-30. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(Ord. of 2-11-2008, § 1(26-42)) 
Sec. 30-31. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the mayor, upon receipt of notice to the city, of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 2-11-2008, § 2(26-43)) 
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of rules of the road. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), as such provisions may be amended from time to time, is adopted as the traffic ordinance for the city, with like effect as if such state law provisions were cited at length in this section. 
(b)  The city clerk shall, for as long as this chapter is in effect, make O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 available for inspection by the public during regular office hours of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 28-1; Ord. of 4-10-2000, §§ 11-101, 11-102) 
Sec. 32-2. - Authority to erect and use traffic signs and signals. 
The chief of police or marshal of the city shall have the authority to erect and use traffic signs and signals in the streets of the city, as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 28-2; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-401) 
Sec. 32-3. - Compliance with signs and signals; damage or removal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the instructions displayed on signs and signals, and it shall be unlawful for any person to damage or remove any such equipment without proper authority from the police department of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 28-3; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-402) 
Sec. 32-4. - Speed limits. 
(a)  On-system. The following speed zones are established for State Highways 41 and 85W, with signs to be erected by the state department of transportation: 
(1)  SR 41. 
a.  From the south city limits (m.p. 5.11) to Main Street (m.p. 5.75), a distance of 0.64 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
b.  From Main Street (m.p. 5.75) to Alt. SR 85 (m.p. 5.91), a distance of 0.16 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
c.  From Alt. SR 85 (m.p. 5.91) to the north city limits (m.p. 6.14), a distance of 0.23 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(2)  Alt. SR 85. 
a.  From the west city limits (m.p. 3.38) to the CSX Railroad overpass (m.p. 4.00), a distance of 0.67 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
b.  From the CSX Railroad overpass (m.p. 4.00) to the east city limits (m.p. 4.27), a distance of 0.27 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(3)  Other. Broad Street, from SR 41 to River Road, a distance of 0.39 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(b)  Off-system. Speed limits on the streets listed in this subsection shall be as indicated, with signs to be erected by the city: 
(1)  Bullock Street, from Oak Street to SR 41, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(2)  Cold Springs Road, from SR 41 to Alt. SR 85, a distance of 0.36 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(3)  Cold Springs Road, from Alt. SR 85 to SR 41, a distance of 0.36 miles, to be zoned for 20 mph. 
(4)  Green Street, from River Road to dead end, a distance of 0.35 miles, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(5)  Main Street, from SR 41 to Fisheries Street, a distance of 0.35 miles, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(6)  Main Street, from SR 41 to Broad Street, a distance of 0.10 miles, to be zoned for 15 mph. 
(7)  Oak Street, from Broad Street Ext. to Bullock Street, a distance of 0.23 miles, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(Code 2002, § 28-4; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-202; Ord. of 6-11-2000) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Secs. 32-5—32-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 32-27. - Prohibited at certain places. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or with the provisions of this article or in compliance with the directions of a police officer in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within five feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  In a crosswalk. 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(7)  Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(8)  At any place where signs prohibit stopping or standing. 
(9)  Within one foot of another parked vehicle. 
(10)  Upon any street, other than an alley, leaving less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
(Code 2002, § 28-41; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-501) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203. 
Sec. 32-28. - Towing of improperly parked vehicles. 
The chief of police, or his designee, may tow any improperly parked vehicle to some convenient storage place, to be redeemed by a fine set by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 28-42; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-502) 
Sec. 32-29. - Parking in alleys. 
No driver, operator or person having charge of any motor vehicle, shall park the vehicle in or along any alley in the city, except for such time as may be necessary for the purpose of immediately taking on or discharging passengers or freight. 
(Code 2002, § 28-43; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-503) 
Sec. 32-30. - Parking vehicle for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle displayed for sale upon a street. 
(Code 2002, § 28-44; Ord. of 4-10-2000, § 11-504) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6)-(7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide for the development storage and distribution of water. Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-19. - Application for water and sewer service; deposit required. 
The customer shall make application on the prescribed form for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall, and at the time the application is made shall make a cash security deposit in the amount determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 30-31; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 2) 
Sec. 34-20. - Administrative fee. 
In addition to the cash deposit in accordance with section 34-19, there shall be paid a nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 30-32; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 3) 
Sec. 34-21. - Tap fees. 
(a)  Persons desiring to connect to the city water and or sewer system shall pay a tap fee in the amount determined by the mayor and council. 
(b)  For any tap which is not of the standard three-fourths-inch, the additional costs will be charged to the customer for the meter and necessary fittings. 
(Code 2002, § 30-33; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 4) 
Sec. 34-22. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued, and all amounts owing are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied toward the settlement of the account. Any remaining balance will be refunded to the consumer at his last known address. If the security deposit is insufficient to fully satisfy the account, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  Service that has been disconnected for nonpayment will be restored only after payment of all outstanding balances, including the reconnection charge and any additional security deposit that may be required by the mayor and council. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to discontinue service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  Prevention of fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard for the city's regulations; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 2002, § 30-34; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 11) 
Sec. 34-23. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property of the consumer to be served. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension of its water and or sewer lines, as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(f)  Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not, under any circumstances, furnish water free of charge to any person, unless approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 30-35; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 5) 
Sec. 34-24. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household, guests and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use such water. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of the consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private inline cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  To be entitled to receive water from the city's water system, applicants must offer proof that private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system. By becoming consumers of the city's system, applicants covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city system, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. Additionally, the consumer shall not discharge any wastewater to the sewer system that is not generated by potable water furnished by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 30-36; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 6(A)—(E)) 
Sec. 34-25. - Acceptable and unacceptable discharge limits. 
The consumer agrees to limit discharge into the sewage system to that strength of sewage defined by trade usage as domestic sewage. The limitations on acceptable discharge are: 
(1)  Inadmissible. 
a.  The following wastes are strictly inadmissible: 
1.  Wastes which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage lines or treatment plant; 
2.  Waste products which will impair the hydraulic capacity of the sewer system; 
3.  Wastes which, in any quantity, create a hazard to people, the sewer system, the treatment process or the receiving waters. 
b.  Examples of such inadmissible wastes are as follows: gasoline, fuel line discharge, cleaning solvents and paint vehicles; ashes, sand, cinders, metal, broken glass, wood and metal shavings, rags and unshredded garbage; and hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, cyanides, acids and caustics. 
(2)  Maximum temperature. The maximum permissible temperature of any discharge shall be 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Oils, fats and grease. Volatile oils shall not be allowed in any amount. Mineral oil shall be removed to the maximum degree practical before discharge. Vegetable oils, fats and grease shall be limited to no more than 15 milligrams per liter (mg/l). Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed where food is prepared or served for public consumption and or sale. 
a.  Interceptors are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
b.  All interceptors shall be of a type and with the capacity to handle excessive amounts of grease, oil and sand. 
c.  Interceptors shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for regular and timely cleaning and inspection. 
d.  Interceptors shall be supplied, and properly maintained in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
e.  All eating and/or drinking establishments, ice cream parlors, schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, motels, and bed and breakfasts shall be in compliance with this article before an occupational tax certificate can be issued. 
f.  Establishment not in compliance with this article shall be in violation punishable as set forth in the city Charter. 
(4)  pH. The pH of influent waste shall be between 5.5 and 9.5. 
(5)  Acceptable discharges. 
a.  Substances toxic to biological wastewater treatment processes such as copper, chromium, lead, zinc, arsenic and nickel may also be limited if such substances are present in sufficient quantity to adversely affect treatment. Acceptable amounts of such substances are as follows, unless otherwise determined by independent study and accepted by the city: 
1.  Nickel: Equal to or less than five mg/l. 
2.  Zinc: Equal to or less than ten mg/l. 
3.  Chromium (+3): Equal to or less than ten mg/l. 
4.  Chromium (+6): Equal to or less than 0.05 mg/l. 
5.  Chlorine residual: Equal to or less than 0.5 mg/l. 
6.  Cyanides: None allowed. 
7.  Cyanates: None allowed. 
8.  Isocyanates: None allowed. 
b.  All others: None allowed without an independent justifying study and tests accepted by the city. 
(6)  BOD. The maximum allowable five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that will be accepted without surcharge payments shall be 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(7)  Suspended solids. The maximum allowable amount of suspended solids that will be accepted without surcharge payments shall be 250 mg/l. 
(Code 2002, § 30-37; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 6(F)) 
Sec. 34-26. - Surcharge assessments. 
(a)  Users of the city's wastewater system may be subject to annual sampling of their wastewater discharge at the discretion of the mayor and council. The purpose of such sampling shall be to determine if the user is in compliance with the terms of this article. Contributors to the system will be charged for any BOD and suspended solids which exceed the limits of section 34-25. 
(b)  Monthly surcharge billings shall be based on the amount of water used. BOD and suspended solids which exceed the limits of section 34-25 are computed as follows: 
(1)  BOD (in mg/l) times 8.34 times water consumption times $0.12. 
(2)  Suspended solids (in mg/l) times 8.34 times water consumption times $0.12. 
(3)  Where water consumption is expressed in millions of gallons. 
(4)  Wastewater sampling results shall be used as a basis for the surcharge for not more than 12 months. 
(Code 2002, § 30-38; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 7) 
Sec. 34-27. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water and sewer services and their facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the systems shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer lines. 
(Code 2002, § 30-39; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 8) 
Sec. 34-28. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure, or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises. Failure to do so will make him liable for payment for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 2002, § 30-40; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 9) 
Secs. 34-29—34-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 34-60. - Rate schedule. 
The water and sewer rates, meter rates included, shall be as determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 30-61; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-11-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 34-61. - Meter reading; billing; collections. 
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed on such days each month as may be determined by the city. Failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment by the due date shown on the bill will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. All charges, current and past due, including additional charges and fees, must be paid in full before the consumer's water meter will be reconnected. A reconnection charge as established from time to time by the mayor and council shall be imposed. 
(3)  Failure to make payment within 60 days of the original billing date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate service. In such event, the consumer shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(4)  The owners of vacant or unoccupied property may continue to receive water and sewer service. However, meter and usage charges must continue to be paid. Once service is terminated, a new user or owner of vacant or unoccupied property shall be treated as new users, and shall apply for service and pay fees and deposits as per sections 34-20 and 34-21. 
(5)  Bills shall be paid, in person or by mail, at the city hall. Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent, nor relieve the consumer from payment of such bills. 
(6)  Partial payments will not be accepted at any time. Disputed bills shall be paid in full, and a request for adjustment may be filed with the city clerk for consideration by the mayor and council at the next meeting following receipt of such request. 
(Code 2002, § 30-62; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 10) 
Sec. 34-62. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If a consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not prevent discontinuance of service as provided in section 34-61. The consumer may pay such bill under protest, and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee as established from time to time by the mayor and council; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was misread, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of conducting the test, but not less than an amount as established from time to time by the mayor and council. No charge will be made, however, if the meter is found to over register beyond three percent of the correct volume. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 2002, § 30-63; Ord. of 1-10-2000(1), § 12) 
Secs. 34-63—34-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Sec. 34-83. - General requirements. 
(a)  Introduction. 
(1)  Safe and high quality drinking water is a precious resource in the state and the city. This drought contingency and water emergency plan (the "plan") requires that the available water treatment and storage resources of the city water plant be put to maximum beneficial use along with the available water resources and storage of the city to the maximum extent possible. 
(2)  The plan also requires that the waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of water be extended with a view to reasonable and beneficial use in the interests of the people of the city and for the public health and welfare. This is especially true during times of drought or emergency. Emergency conditions resulting from equipment or system failures are also addressed in this plan. 
(b)  Coordination. 
(1)  This plan has been coordinated with the mayor, the city council, the chief of police, the water plant superintendent, and interested citizens. 
(2)  The plan will be reviewed and updated as necessary at a minimum of every two years. The plan is subject to the requirement that at least one public hearing be held. 
(c)  Authorization. The mayor on behalf of the city council is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. The mayor shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought stages or water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(d)  Public education. The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be increased, reduced or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases, public service announcements, utility bill inserts, public events, and similar methods. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-75) 
Sec. 34-84. - Application. 
(a)  The provisions of this plan shall apply to all customers of the city. Utilization of a water source other than city potable water is exempt from the provisions of this plan. Daily water demand will be monitored for drought and emergency conditions by the city. Trigger conditions under this plan will be based on reductions in flow from the cold spring, a lack of treatment capacity, an emergency situation caused by a natural disaster, equipment or system failure, or high daily average water demand. 
(b)  The mayor, on recommendation of city water plant operator, shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. 
(c)  The trigger conditions described below are based on the fact that the city uses water from the cold spring under a proposed state issued withdrawal permit as its water supply. Importantly, the city has contractual agreements whereby the U.S. Fish Hatchery is entitled to two-thirds of the water which can be produced by the cold spring which will not be impacted. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-76) 
Sec. 34-85. - Trigger conditions. 
(a)  Monitoring of water demand. Daily water demand will be monitored for emergency conditions by the city water plant operator and water plant employees. Trigger conditions will be based on emergency situations caused by drought conditions, a natural disaster, equipment or system failure, or high daily average water demand. The mayor, on the recommendation of the water plant operator, shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each state of the plan. 
(1)  Stage 1; standard water conservation. 
a.  Customers may be required to conserve water on an ongoing basis as the standard for the city. Customers must adhere to water restrictions on nonessential water use, as outlined herein in responses to trigger conditions, stage 1; standard water conservation. 
b.  These water restrictions are adopted as the standard operating procedure for nonessential water usage on a year round basis. 
(2)  Stage 2; high water demand. 
a.  Requirement for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential water uses, as outlined herein in responses to trigger conditions, stage 2, when average daily water production at the city water plant exceeds 300,000 gallons (0.30 mil gal) per day for five consecutive days. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded by the mayor when the condition listed above as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of five consecutive days. 
c.  Resumption of previous stage. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative. 
(3)  Stage 3; severe water shortage. 
a.  Requirements. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restriction on nonessential water uses, as outlined herein in responses to trigger conditions, stage 3, when average daily water production at the city water plant exceeds 300,000 gallons (0.35 mil gals) per day for five consecutive days. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded by the mayor when the condition listed above as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative as directed by the mayor. 
(4)  Stage 4; water supply emergency. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customer shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential water uses, as outlined herein in responses to trigger conditions, stage 4, when: 
1.  Average daily water production at the city water plant exceeds 375,000 gallons (0.375 mil gals) per day for five consecutive days; 
2.  The city water system is contaminated whether accidentally or intentionally. A water supply emergency condition is reached immediately upon detection; or 
3.  The city water system fails for any reason. A water supply emergency condition is reached immediately upon detection. 
b.  Requirement for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded by the mayor when the condition listed above as triggering events have ceased to exist. Upon termination of stage 4, the previously initiated stage becomes operative as directed by the mayor. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  Public meeting. This plan will be presented to the public at a formal public meeting of the city council. 
(2)  Publication. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of publication in the legal organ, in a newspaper widely circulated in the city and/or by public service announcements on local radio, television and/or cable service. Additional methods of public notification may include signs posted in public places, utility bill inserts, and other means to be determined by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-77) 
Sec. 34-86. - Responses to trigger conditions. 
The city shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance the triggering criteria set forth herein, shall determine that a voluntary, moderate or severe shortage condition exists and shall implement the following actions upon notice as provided herein: 
(1)  Stage 1; standard water conservation. 
a.  Generally. The goal for stage 1 of the plan is to raise public and customer awareness of water demand, conditions, and water conservation and to limit the nonessential use of outdoor water especially as it relates to watering of lawns, plants and flowers. 
b.  Standard water use restrictions. Water customers are required to limit nonessential residential and commercial water use by practicing water conservation year round and reducing nonessential water uses, as follows: 
1.  Standard outdoor watering restrictions. 
(i)  Odd-numbered addresses may water only on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. Watering is allowed only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m. and only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes per watering. 
(ii)  Even-numbered addresses may water only on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. Watering is allowed only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m. and only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes per watering. 
(iii)  No outdoor watering on Fridays. 
2.  Low flow devices required. Beginning January 1, 2010, the city shall require the installation of low flow water devices in all new construction and/or renovation within the city limits; specifically, but not limited to, toilets, faucets, and showerheads. Such low flow devices shall be required as a condition under any building permit issued with the city limits. 
(2)  Stage 2; high water demand. 
a.  Generally. The goal for stage 2 of the plan is to reduce and maintain average daily water production at or below 300,000 gallons (0.30 mil gals) per day. 
b.  Standard water use restrictions. In the event that the mayor enacts stage 2, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: All water customers are required to participate in the two day per week watering schedule for nonessential water use. Nonessential water use shall only occur on the designated outdoor watering days. The initial two-day watering schedule shall be as follows unless adjusted by resolution of the city council: 
1.  Odd-numbered addresses may water only on either Tuesdays or Thursdays, but not both days, during each week. Watering is allowed only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m., and only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
2.  Even-numbered addresses may water only on either Mondays or Wednesdays but not both days during each week. Watering is allowed only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m., and only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
3.  No outdoor watering on Fridays, Saturdays or Sundays. 
(i)  Nonessential water use is permitted under subsection (2)b.1 of this section with the following restrictions: The use of hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user, by drip irrigation, by soaker hose, or by handheld buckets. 
(ii)  Subsection (2)b.1 of this section time restrictions do not apply to: 
A.  The irrigation of commercial plant nurseries. 
B.  Irrigation using reclaimed water. 
C.  New landscape installation during planting and the first ten days after planting. 
D.  The testing of new irrigation systems or existing irrigation systems being tested or under repair. 
(iii)  The washing of individual automobiles, trucks, motorbikes, boats, trailers, airplanes or other vehicles is not permitted. 
(iv)  The washing of individual vehicles may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. 
(v)  This restriction does not apply to the washing of vehicles or any other type of mobile equipment (such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing. 
(vi)  Charity car washes are prohibited. 
(vii)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is permitted only on designated watering days as provided under stage 2, subsection 2(b) of this section. 
(viii)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life. This restriction does not apply to ornamental fountains or ponds that use reclaimed water, non-potable water, or water sources other than the city water supply. 
(ix)  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. Use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed when a variance has been approved by the mayor. 
(x)  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is permitted only on designated watering days. These restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of any golf course that uses reclaimed water, or other non-potable water sources. 
(xi)  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to their patrons except when requested. 
(xii)  The following uses constitute a waste of water and are prohibited: 
A.  Noncommercial pressure washing; 
B.  Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, patios or other hard-surfaced areas except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards. 
C.  Use of water for dust control. 
D.  Allowing water to run off a property or allowing water to pond in the street or parking lot. 
E.  Operating an irrigation system with sprinkler heads that are broken or out of adjustment. 
F.  Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak. 
G.  Washing an automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane, or other mobile equipment with a hand-held hose not equipped with a pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
(3)  Stage 3; severe water shortage. 
a.  Generally. The goal for stage 3 of the plan is to reduce and maintain average daily water demand at or below 350,000 gallons (0.35 mil gals) per day. 
b.  Standard water use restrictions. In the event that the mayor enacts stage 3, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
1.  Supply management measures. The city will cease the flushing of water mains except when necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. All city departments will discontinue irrigating public landscaped areas except when such areas are irrigated with reclaimed water, or water sources other than that provided by the city. 
2.  Additional water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3, with these additional water use restrictions: 
(i)  No outdoor watering for lawns, plants, and gardens shall be allowed. 
(ii)  Nonessential water use is restricted to use of hand-held buckets, or hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle, or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
(iii)  No pressure washing of homes or buildings shall be allowed. 
(iv)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment not occurring on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or a commercial service station and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety, and welfare are prohibited. 
(v)  Commercial plant nurseries may use only hand-held buckets, or handheld hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle, or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
(vi)  The filling, refilling, or adding of potable water to ornamental fountains, decorative fountains or pools, swimming or wading pools is prohibited. 
(vii)  No new landscapes of any type may be installed. 
(viii)  All variances granted under a previous stage shall be invalid during stage 3. The use of water under variances granted by the mayor is to be discontinued. 
(4)  Stage 4; water supply emergency. The goal for stage 4, water supply emergency, is to rectify the emergency and return to normal operating conditions as soon as possible. In the event of an imminent or actual water supply emergency due to either loss of water supply sources (including contamination) and/or system failure, the mayor has the authority to initiate the following water supply emergency responses: 
a.  Effective immediately upon initiation of stage 4, all nonessential water use shall be discontinued, except for immediate health and safety purposes. 
b.  In the event that water shortage or water emergency conditions threaten public health, safety, and welfare, the mayor, upon recommendation of city water plant operator, may order water rationing and/or terminate service to selected users of the system in accordance with the following sequence: 
1.  Recreational users; 
2.  Commercial users; 
3.  Residential users; 
4.  School users; and 
5.  Hospitals, public health, and safety facilities. 
c.  Prior to the termination of any service to any user, the mayor shall first attempt to ration water usage. Such rationing does not have to be uniform or pro rata between any of the classifications of subsection (3) of this section. 
d.  Public notification of stage 4 conditions. In the event that minimum health and safety standards for drinking water are not met during emergency conditions, public service announcements on local television and radio stations will be utilized to notify the public of the emergency conditions and response measures. These response measures may include notifying the public of the need to boil water, use bottled water, or use a designated alternate water source, as appropriate. 
e.  Emergency management assistance. If necessary, the mayor on behalf of the city may seek assistance through the local and/or state emergency management programs. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-78) 
Sec. 34-87. - Variances. 
(a)  The mayor may, in writing, grant a temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variances, or if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this ordinance shall file a petition for variance with the city. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the mayor and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner; 
(2)  Purpose of water use; 
(3)  Specific provision of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
(4)  Detailed statements as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this plan; 
(5)  Description of the relief requested; 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date; 
(8)  Estimated water savings, as a percentage of normal monthly water use, while operating under the variance requested; and 
(9)  Other information requested by the city. 
(c)  Variances granted by the mayor shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted in a particular stage shall expire upon advancing to a more restrictive stage of the plan. 
(3)  Petitioners shall prominently display the variance granted where it can be read by the general public at all location for which the variance applies, and make said variance available to the public. 
(4)  Variances granted may be revoked by the mayor if the petitioner fails to meet specific requirements set forth in the variance. 
(d)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(e)  No variance may be granted as to a stage 4, water supply emergency. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-79) 
Sec. 34-88. - Wholesale agreements/contracts provision. 
In the event that the trigger conditions specified by stage 3, severe water shortage, or stage 4, water supply emergency, of this plan are met and a stage 3 or stage 4 condition declared by the mayor is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies to wholesale customers on a pro rata basis. This stipulation applies to all existing and future wholesale water supply contracts or agreements made with the city. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-80) 
Sec. 34-89. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to any fines provided for by local ordinance, no person shall allow potable water from the city to be used for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the mayor in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  If a person should have two or more distinct violations of this plan, the city shall provide written notice to the person of proposed termination of service. The notice shall apprise the person of a date for termination of service, the reasons for such termination, and afford the person an opportunity to present his objections to termination in a hearing before the city council. 
(c)  The person shall have not less than ten days to present his objections in writing to the mayor and the city council. 
(d)  If, after hearing, the city council determines that service will be terminated; such termination shall take place within five business days. Services discontinued pursuant to this plan and/or by local ordinance shall be restored only upon payment of the re-connection charge in the amount of $200.00 and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing or reconnecting service. 
(e)  In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the mayor, that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Anyone who after disconnection pursuant to this plan and later re-connection may be permanently prohibited from receiving water service or may be required to post a bond in an amount satisfactory to the city council in order to receive future city water service. 
(f)  Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the superior court. In such event, if the city is upheld, the customer shall pay attorney's fees and costs. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-81) 
Sec. 34-90. - Presumptions. 
(a)  Any person, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates, shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he did not commit the violation. 
(b)  Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2010, § 30-82) 
Secs. 34-91—34-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 34-109. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2(41-2), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 34-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency, pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2(41-3), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 34-111. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2(41-4), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 34-112. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provide by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2(41-5), 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 34-113. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2(41-6), 9-14-2009) 
Chapter 36 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Company means the holder of a license to operate a horse-drawn carriage business under the provisions of this article whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a horse-drawn carriage on the streets of the city for a licensed company. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a horse-drawn carriage within the city. 
Horse-drawn carriage means any hack or carriage which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Inspector (chief of police or his designee) means the individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for enforcing this article, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided in this article. 
License means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages within the corporate limits of the city. 
Stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the mayor as reserved exclusively for the use of horse-drawn carriages. 
(Code 2002, § 32-31; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-1) 
Sec. 36-20. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violation of this article may be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. Penalties for violation of this article are as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a fine of $100.00. 
(2)  Second offense, a fine of $500.00. 
(3)  Third offense, license revoked. 
(Code 2002, § 32-32) 
Sec. 36-21. - Licensing of horse-drawn carriage companies. 
(a)  License. 
(1)  Required. No person shall operate a business involving the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. The license shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by ordinance. The annual license fee shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Application. Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk and shall provide such information as is required for other business license applications, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation. 
(3)  Certification of EIA. Each applicant must produce, if demanded by the mayor or city clerk, a valid equine infectious anemia (EIA) certification. 
(b)  Operating regulations. In addition to the license requirements imposed in this section, no license shall be issued to any carriage operator unless the operator complies with the following operating regulations: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each draft animal before it is placed into service. One such health inspection shall be required for each animal within six months of the application for a license. The inspector may require reexamination of any animal upon appearance of any adverse condition of the animal. 
(2)  No single animal shall pull a carriage holding more than ten people, including the driver. 
(3)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(4)  Each draft animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. 
(5)  Each animal shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(6)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(7)  No driver may use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other persons may forcefully strike an animal, and make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(8)  No driver shall permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except in extreme emergency situations. 
(9)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(10)  Adequate water shall be provided. 
(11)  Ventilation adequate to ensure the health and comfort of animals shall be provided. 
(12)  Food shall be free of contamination. 
(13)  All laws as cited as the Humane Care for Equines Act (O.C.G.A. § 4-13-1 et seq.), as well as all other state and federal laws governing equines. 
(14)  No one animal may be worked more than eight hours per day. The driver must keep a log of the starting and ending times for each animal. Such log should be kept in a bound book form and stored on the carriage being pulled. 
(15)  No driver shall work an animal pulling a horse-drawn carriage when the outside temperature exceeds 95 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(c)  Inspection of operating practices. The inspector shall be empowered to inspect all operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this article. 
(d)  Failure to comply with article provisions; nonissuance. Any applicant who refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be issued a business license until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the inspector. The licensing requirements of this section shall be ongoing as requirements for continuous operation. 
(e)  Suspension. The city clerk may, upon recommendation of the inspector, temporarily suspend any carriage company license for violation of the provisions of this article, subject to license revocation action. 
(Code 2002, § 32-33; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-2) 
Sec. 36-22. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any horse-drawn carriage company operating under this article shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company under this article. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of a horse-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any horse-drawn carriage company desiring a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a horse-drawn carriage. The minimum coverage shall be $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a horse-drawn carriage company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a horse-drawn carriage in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate horse-drawn carriage for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one horse-drawn carriage, in which event such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the horse-drawn carriages actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning horse-drawn carriages who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed horse-drawn carriage name. 
(d)  Notice when voided. Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice shall be given by the licensee in writing, to the city clerk at least five days before the policy shall take effect. 
(Code 2002, § 32-34; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-3) 
Sec. 36-23. - Driver's permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a horse-drawn carriage company shall permit a horse-drawn carriage to be driven, and no horse-drawn carriage operating under a horse-drawn carriage company licensed by the city shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the horse-drawn carriage shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the city clerk on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall be made under oath and shall state the age of the applicant, date of birth, his address, and whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this article or other ordinances of the city, and, if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(c)  Qualifications of applicant. An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must not be less than 18 years of age, with no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory horse-drawn carriage driver. 
(d)  Fee. Before any permit is granted under this article, a driver's permit fee in the amount established by the mayor and council shall be paid by the applicant. 
(e)  Current state driver's license required. Any person applying for a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. 
(f)  Examination of applicant. It shall be the duty of the inspector to examine the applicant, police and traffic record, and other vouchers, and thereafter recommend to the clerk to grant or refuse the permit. In the event of a refusal by the clerk to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal to the mayor and council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing to the mayor and council within ten calendar days from the date of refusal to grant the permit. The mayor and council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the written appeal. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the mayor shall render a written decision as to the mayor and council's decision on the appeal. 
(g)  Displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the horse-drawn carriage to be operated by the holder of the permit, where the permit will be in clear view of the passengers at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is for hire. 
(h)  Alteration. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(i)  Transfer. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. 
(j)  Duration. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed upon application and payment of the required fee, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(k)  Suspension. The inspector shall recommend to the city clerk to suspend the driver's permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  Making any false statement in the application for the person; or 
(2)  Operating a horse-drawn carriage in violation of any provision of this article or of state law. 
The suspension by the city clerk shall be lifted upon dismissal or dropping of the charges described upon correction of the violation of any provision of this article, upon ruling in favor of the driver in any appeal hearing before the mayor and council, or at the expiration of 60 days from the date of suspension. From the decision to suspend a permit, the holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and council. All suspension appeals must be filed in writing with the mayor and council within ten calendar days from the date of the suspension, and the mayor and council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the filing by the city clerk of the written appeal. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the mayor shall render a written decision as to the mayor and council's decision on the appeal. 
(l)  Revocation. If any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in subsection (c) of this section or fails to operate his horse-drawn carriage in accordance with the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall be empowered to permanently revoke the permit. The holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and council in the manner prescribed in subsection (n) of this section. 
(m)  Driving after revocation or suspension. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(n)  Appeals. Any appeal of a decision made by the city clerk to revoke a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, pursuant to this section, shall be made in writing to the mayor and council within ten calendar days of the ruling. The mayor and council must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from the filing of the city clerk of the written appeal. The appellant shall have the right to present evidence, examine the evidence of the appellee, and to cross examine. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by counsel. Within five calendar days from the appeals hearing, the mayor shall render a written decision as to the mayor and council's decision on the appeal. 
(Code 2002, § 32-35; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-4) 
Sec. 36-24. - General identification and marking. 
Every horse-drawn carriage shall have a sign plainly painted on the rear of each vehicle. The sign shall contain the full name of the horse-drawn carriage company operating the vehicle. Additionally, the sign shall conform with all sign standards for the city and be approved by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 32-36; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-5) 
Sec. 36-25. - Safe mechanical condition required. 
Every horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is in service. 
(Code 2002, § 32-37; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-6) 
Sec. 36-26. - Cleanliness required. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Code 2002, § 32-38; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-7) 
Sec. 36-27. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each horse-drawn carriage may be inspected by the inspector for compliance with the provisions of this article and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as a horse-drawn carriage in the city. Each horse-drawn carriage involved in an accident shall be inspected by the inspector before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Inspections of the horse-drawn carriages may be done at any time by the inspector. 
(Code 2002, § 32-39; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-8) 
Sec. 36-28. - Authority for removal from streets. 
The inspector shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a horse-drawn carriage which is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the horse-drawn carriage until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the inspector to remove a vehicle from the streets may be appealed to the city clerk, and the mayor and council, as provided for in section 36-23(n). The appeal must be made in writing to the city clerk no later than ten calendar days after the inspector has exercised his authority in removing a horse-drawn carriage from the street for violation of this article. The city clerk must convene a hearing within ten calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and must render a written decision to the appellant within five calendar days of the close of the hearing. 
(Code 2002, § 32-40; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-9) 
Sec. 36-29. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No owner or driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn carriage than in accordance with the published and advertised rates, which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 2002, § 32-41; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-10) 
Sec. 36-30. - Driver not to leave vehicle while waiting to be hired. 
It is unlawful for any driver of any horse-drawn carriage to leave the vehicle or the immediate premises of the vehicle while the vehicle is parked and while waiting to be hired. 
(Code 2002, § 32-42; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-11) 
Sec. 36-31. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a horse-drawn carriage as passengers than the seating capacity of his horse-drawn carriage, not to exceed ten. 
(Code 2002, § 32-43; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-12) 
Sec. 36-32. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Code 2002, § 32-44; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-13) 
Sec. 36-33. - Weight restrictions. 
The aggregate weight of the carriage, passengers and driver shall not exceed two times the body weight of the horse. 
(Code 2002, § 32-45; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-14) 
Sec. 36-34. - Movement of carriage prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his horse-drawn carriage is in motion. 
(Code 2002, § 32-46; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-15) 
Sec. 36-35. - Property left in carriage by passenger. 
Any horse-drawn carriage driver or operator, discovering in any horse-drawn carriage under his control, personal property which was lost or left by a passenger of such horse-drawn carriage, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the police department within two hours after the discovery of the property. 
(Code 2002, § 32-47; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-16) 
Sec. 36-36. - Safety equipment required. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and reflectors. Such lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in all directions. Each horse-drawn carriage shall have on board at all times a first aid kit. 
(b)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with a suitable friction braking system which will enable the carriage to stop. Such braking system shall be functional and operative at all times. 
(Code 2002, § 32-48; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-17) 
Sec. 36-37. - Area of operation. 
The inspector or mayor and council may elect to set a route for horse-drawn carriages, to include a designated site for a loading and unloading stand. 
(Code 2002, § 32-49; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-18) 
Sec. 36-38. - Sanitation requirements. 
Manure and urine must be immediately treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed immediately from the street by the carriage operator. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and airtight container. Horse diapers, which prevent excrement from being deposited on the street surface may be used in lieu of a scoop shovel and an airtight container at the option of the operator. In the case of horse diapers, the diapers must be approved for efficiency by the inspector before they are used. 
(Code 2002, § 32-50; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-19) 
Sec. 36-39. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purpose. 
(b)  Every person riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle within the city limits of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the city, as well as the state. 
(c)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate the animal-drawn vehicles except when the animals are under complete control at all times, and shall be operated with extra caution and due care for the safety of others. 
(Code 2002, § 32-51; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-20) 
Sec. 36-40. - Impediment of traffic flow. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any city street, alley or thoroughfare at any time. Horse-drawn carriages will be required to pull immediately to the nearest curb area when one or more vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in normal traffic flow. 
(Code 2002, § 32-52; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-21) 
Sec. 36-41. - Limits to the number of horse-drawn carriages. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage company to operate more than two horse-drawn carriages for hire on the streets of the city at any given time. The city clerk may authorize more than two carriages to operate upon the company's request. Such request shall be in writing indicating the company's needs for additional carriages. The city clerk may approve the request for special events or with respect to special circumstances upon approval from the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 32-53; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-22) 
Sec. 36-42. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances and regulations of this city can result in the revocation of permit and punishment in municipal court. Any ordinance or laws of this city, county, state or federal agency which governs the treatment of animals, including horses or other animals of burden, must be complied with by the horse-drawn carriage operator, passengers or agents of the horse-drawn carriage company. 
(Code 2002, § 32-54; Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 67-23) 
Chapter 38 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Preamble and enactment clause. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Ga. Const. art. 9, § 4, para. 2, subpara. 15, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the city, lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; able living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; protecting property against blight and depreciation; conserving the value of buildings and structures throughout the municipality, all in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the city council does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
(Code 2002, § 34-1; Ord. of 2-10-2003, art. I) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building includes the term "structure." 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot and located on the same lot as such principal use. 
Alley means a public or private service way which provides only secondary access to the rear or side of abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration, building or structural, means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as any type of supporting structural member) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one zoning district classification to another, or of a building from one location to another. 
Amendment by council means if the city council, by majority vote taken in a properly called council meeting, proposes to take action which will result in a zoning decision, then the city shall follow the requirements for a public hearing as set forth in this Code. 
Apartment building. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Automobile service station means any area of land, including structures therein, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting and major repair. 
Basement means a story having a part but not more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
Boardinghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals and lodging are provided for three or more persons. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Building, accessory, means a subordinate building or a portion of the principal building, the use of which is incidental to the dominant use of the principal building on the same lot. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Building, setback line, means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding steps, gutters and similar fixtures, and the centerline of the abutting street on which the building faces or the right-of-way line, whichever is greater. 
Cellar means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade, and having more than one-half of its height below grade. A cellar is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the proper governing authority shall be the centerline of the street or, if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street, or the middle of the traveled roadway of the street. 
Clinic means a building or a portion of a building where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a physician or group of physicians, or a dentist or group of dentists, practicing together. 
Club, private, means a building, or portion thereof, or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or person for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any other group wherein are received for pay five or more children under 18 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours, but less than 24 hours, for more than one consecutive day. 
District means any section of the city within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used principally for residential occupancy, but not including mobile homes. 
Dwelling, high density residential, means a building designed for and occupied by 11 or more families. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for and occupied exclusively by three to ten families. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed for and occupied exclusively by two families. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, all of whom or all but two of whom are related to each other by birth, adoption or marriage as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, roominghouse, hotel or motel, as herein defined. 
Flea market means an activity where stalls or spaces within the bounds of a specific location are made available to the vendor of handicraft items or the vendors of new merchandise where each new item does not have a price in excess of $50.00, or to vendors of secondhand items. All such vendors may not be manufacturers or the holders of any other retail license for the sale of similar merchandise. 
Flea market stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of flea market booths, appurtenant structures or additions. 
Floodplain means an area within the intermediate regional flood contour elevations subject to periodic flooding as designated by the U.S. Geological Survey of Flood Prone Areas for the Department of Housing and Urban Development and other government agencies. 
Floor area, commercial, business, and industrial, means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. 
Floor area, residential, means the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, including habitable basements, but excluding garages, carports and porches. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage detached from the main dwelling. 
Garage, auto repair, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping and hiring of motor driven vehicles. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the main dwelling. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel is open to the transient public, as opposed to a boardinghouse or a roominghouse, which are herein separately defined. 
Institution means premises occupied by a not-for-profit corporation or establishment for public or semi-public use. 
Junkyard means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
Loading space means a space having a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
Lot means a portion of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a common use, or occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessory buildings and uses, parking spaces, and open spaces belonging to the same and having its principal frontage upon a street. The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" and "parcel." 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, through, means a lot, other than a corner lot, abutting two streets. 
Lot of record means a lot, the boundaries of which were filed as a legal record, whether by subdivision plat or by metes and bounds, at the time of adoption of the ordinances from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot width means the width of the lot at the front building setback line. 
Major street means a street or highway being a part of the system of principal streets as shown on the zoning map. 
Manufactured home means any vehicle or similar structure originally designed or intended to be portable and constructed so as to permit continued occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes, sometimes called "house trailers," but not including a trailer temporarily for recreation purposes. Also termed "mobile home." 
Manufactured home park means any area planned and developed for the exclusive use of non-transient mobile homes, approved by the mayor and council, which conforms to the regulations set forth in this chapter. Also termed "mobile home park." 
Modular home means a factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings used for temporary occupancy of transients and containing no facilities for cooking in the individual units. 
Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this chapter, or amendment thereto, but which does not conform, after the passage of this chapter or amendment thereto, to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nursery school or kindergarten means any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or part-time care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system. 
Nursing home means a home for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar establishments devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Open space means a yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
Outdoor advertising sign means any sign used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the mater advertised or displayed being remote from its origin or point of sale. 
Parking area means an open, unoccupied space used or required for use for parking of vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are charged. 
Parking lot means an open area used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and within which motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged; but no vehicles are to be equipped, repaired, rented or sold. 
Parking space means a space, enclosed or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 200 square feet exclusive of driveways and maneuvering areas, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a driveway. 
Principal use means the primary purpose for which land on a building is used. 
Premises means a lot, together with all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
Roominghouse means a building other than a hotel or motel where lodging for three or more persons not of the immediate family is provided for pre-arranged definite periods and for compensation. 
Sign means a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure, parcel or lot and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business located on the premises. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include official court or governmental notices or the flag emblem or insignia of a nation political unit, school or religion. 
Specialty shop means a retail sales establishment with primary sales of craft, apparel, gift, accessory, furniture, furnishings and other like items, to the public with emphasis on tourist and visitor shoppers. 
Street means a public way for vehicular traffic that is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Trailer court. See Mobile home park. 
Trailer house. See Mobile home. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses; is not more than eight feet in body width and is of any weight, provided its body length does not exceed 29 feet. 
Travel trailer park means any lot on which are temporarily parked two or more travel trailers for a period of less than 30 days. 
Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, includes the term "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the front line of the principal building. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full width of the lot at the rear line of the principal building from the rear line of the lot to the nearest point of the principal building. 
Yard, side, means a yard situated between the principal building and side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning decision means final action by the city council which results in: 
(1)  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
(2)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; or 
(3)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. 
(Code 2002, § 34-3; Ord. of 2-10-2003, art. III) 
Secs. 38-3—38-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-23. - Use. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or parcel of land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except for a use permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Code 2002, § 34-21; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.1) 
Sec. 38-24. - Height and density. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limit for the zoning district in which it is located, nor shall any building or lot be used or occupied hereafter for more families than permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Code 2002, § 34-22; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.2) 
Sec. 38-25. - Yard occupancy. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to occupy any required yard, nor shall any side, rear or front yard be narrower or smaller than is required for the zoning district in which it is located, except as provided in section 38-254. 
(Code 2002, § 34-23; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.3) 
Sec. 38-26. - Yard use limitation. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this article shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space for any other building. 
(Code 2002, § 34-24; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.4) 
Sec. 38-27. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the location and use of buildings, structures and land within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 34-25; Ord. of 2-10-2003, 4.5) 
Sec. 38-28. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street. 
(Code 2002, § 34-26; Ord. of 2-10-2003, 4.6) 
Sec. 38-29. - Necessary repairs permitted. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening of restoration to a safe or lawful condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by the building official, the fire chief, or any other duly authorized city official. 
(Code 2002, § 34-27; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.7) 
Sec. 38-30. - Prohibited when not specified. 
If not otherwise stated, it is the intent of this article that any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided under article IV of this chapter shall be prohibited in that district. The board of zoning appeals shall decide specific judgements about the placement of a disputed use. 
(Code 2002, § 34-28; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 4.8) 
Secs. 38-31—38-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-49. - One principal building per lot. 
Within residential zoning districts, excepting group developments as provided for in section 38-257, no more than one principal building with its customary accessory buildings may occupy, or be constructed upon, any lot. 
(Code 2002, § 34-41; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.1) 
Sec. 38-50. - Reduction in lot area. 
No lot may be reduced in area below the minimum lot area as specified herein for the zoning district within which said lot is located. 
(Code 2002, § 34-42; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.2) 
Sec. 38-51. - Yard requirements of accessory buildings. 
The minimum yard requirements of this article also apply to accessory buildings. However, accessory buildings may be located within rear yards to within five feet of a rear or side lot line. 
(Code 2002, § 34-43; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.3) 
Sec. 38-52. - Attachment of accessory buildings to principal buildings. 
When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is attached. 
(Code 2002, § 34-44; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.4) 
Sec. 38-53. - Distance between buildings. 
Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to a principal building or to any other accessory building. 
(Code 2002, § 34-45; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.5) 
Sec. 38-54. - Frontage on corner lots and double frontage lots. 
On lots having frontage on more than one street, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-46; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.6) 
Sec. 38-55. - Street access. 
No building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot that does not have frontage on a publicly dedicated and maintained street. 
(Code 2002, § 34-47; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.7) 
Sec. 38-56. - Corner visibility clearance. 
No fence, structure, sign, planting or other construction above a height of 3½ feet shall be maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroads, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 2002, § 34-48; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.8) 
Sec. 38-57. - Fences and walls. 
No fence or freestanding wall, other than a retaining wall, shall be more than eight feet in height in a residential district. 
(Code 2002, § 34-49; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.9) 
Sec. 38-58. - Construction of temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work may be permitted in any district but shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction. 
(Code 2002, § 34-50; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.10) 
Sec. 38-59. - Projections into yards. 
(a)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, stoops, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, provided that such features do not project more than three feet into any required yard. 
(b)  Accessory buildings may project into yards, provided that no accessory building may be closer than five feet to a lot line. 
(c)  An open, unroofed porch or paved terrace may project into a required front or rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet, and into a side yard to a point not closer than five feet from any side lot line. 
(Code 2002, § 34-51; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 5.11) 
Secs. 38-60—38-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-77. - Zoning districts. 
For the purpose of this article, the city is divided into the following zoning districts: 

 
(Code 2002, § 34-71; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 6.1; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2)) 
Sec. 38-78. - Zoning district boundaries. 
The boundaries of each zoning district are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Districts Map of the City of Warm Springs, Georgia," adopted by the city council and certified by the city clerk. Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be on file in the city hall. 
(Code 2002, § 34-72; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 6.2) 
Sec. 38-79. - Rules for determining boundaries of zoning districts. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the exact location of the boundary of any zoning district shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a boundary is indicated as approximately following the centerline of a street, or a railroad, or a drainage course, such centerline shall be construed to be the boundary. 
(2)  Where a boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be the boundary. 
(3)  Where the location of a boundary is not otherwise indicated as specified above, or dimensioned on the zoning map, said boundary shall be located by use of the scale on the zoning map. 
(4)  Where a public street, road or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the zoning regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street, road or alley. 
(Code 2002, § 34-73; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 6.3) 
Secs. 38-80—38-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USES PERMITTED IN ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-102. - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in each of the zoning districts shall be only those listed in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-91; Ord. of 2-10-2003, art. VII) 
Sec. 38-103. - R-1 Residential, Single-Family. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes, with a minimum of 1,200 square feet of living space. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and provided the requirements of article VII of this chapter are met. 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(4)  Public utility installations and lands. 
(5)  Nurseries and truck gardens, except that no retail sales shall be made on the premises. 
(6)  Forest and agricultural uses except commercial dairies. Livestock is permitted in accordance with chapter 6. All livestock shall be fenced in an acceptable manner. 
(7)  Day care centers, provided that the requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter are met. 
(8)  Passive recreation areas. 
(9)  Home swimming pools, provided the location is not closer than ten feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four feet in height. 
(b)  Minimum lot requirements specified in article VI of this chapter must be met. 
(Code 2002, § 34-92; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.1) 
Sec. 38-104. - R-2 Residential, Two-Family. 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1, subject to restrictions set forth in section 38-103; and: 
(1)  Two-family dwellings, provided that each dwelling unit has a minimum of 1,000 square feet of total living space. 
(2)  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings and similar public service facilities serving residential areas. 
(3)  Cemeteries, provided that the requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter are met. 
(4)  Schools, public and private. 
(5)  Private, not-for-profit clubs or lodges when located on at least two acres, and when any building or activity related thereto is located at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
(6)  Hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes and charitable or philanthropic institutions, when located on at least one acre, and when any building or activity related thereto is located at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
(7)  Riding stables and academies, when located on at least 20 acres, and when any building or activity related thereto is located at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
(8)  Public or private golf courses, except miniature courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes. 
(9)  Churches, when located on at least one acre, and when any building or activity related thereto is located at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
(b)  Minimum lot requirements specified in article VI of this chapter must be met. 
(Code 2002, § 34-93; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.2) 
Sec. 38-105. - R-3 Residential, Multifamily. 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2, subject to the restrictions set forth in sections 38-103 and 38-104; and: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings, provided that each dwelling unit has a minimum of 750 square feet of total living space. 
(2)  Roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
(3)  Mobile homes and mobile home parks, provided the requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter are met. 
(4)  Office buildings exclusively used for professional occupancy, and of such character and nature that such use will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
(5)  Automobile service stations. 
(6)  Hotels and motels. 
(7)  Travel trailer parks, provided they meet the requirements set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  Minimum lot requirements specified in article VI of this chapter must be met. 
(Code 2002, § 34-94; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.3) 
Sec. 38-106. - R-4 Planned Unit Development. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Townhomes. 
(3)  Golf, country club, pool and recreation court. 
(4)  Community facilities. 
(5)  Accessory retail and service uses, located wholly within a building, and limited to convenience retail and service establishments such as pro shops, personal services, and restaurants accessory to a club, or as permitted by council. No outdoor advertising is allowed. 
(Code 2002, § 34-95; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2)) 
Sec. 38-107. - C-1 Commercial. 
All uses permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3, subject to the restrictions set forth in sections 38-103 through 38-105; and: 
(1)  Specialty shops. 
(2)  Restaurants. 
(3)  Banking and lending institutions. 
(4)  Florists. 
(5)  Miniature golf courses. 
(6)  Driving ranges. 
(7)  Photography studios. 
(8)  Commercial parking lots. 
(9)  Service businesses. 
(Code 2002, § 34-96; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.4; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2); Ord. of 8-9-2005) 
Sec. 38-108. - C-2 Commercial. 
All uses permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, and C-1, subject to the restrictions set forth in sections 38-103, 38-104, 38-105 and 38-107, and: 
(1)  Retail stores. 
(2)  Amusement and recreation businesses, including theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
(3)  Hardware or building material sales. 
(4)  Personal services. 
(5)  Business, music, art and dancing schools. 
(6)  Clinics, veterinarian offices, but not outside kennels. 
(7)  Laundry and dry cleaning services, including coin-operated laundromats. 
(8)  Repair services. 
(9)  Commercial parking lots, private vehicle storage and parking spaces. 
(10)  Mortuaries. 
(11)  Lodges and organizational meeting halls. 
(12)  Millenary, dressmaking and tailoring activities. 
(13)  Food stores, including supermarkets with off-street parking and loading for vehicles in operating condition. 
(14)  Retail sales of new or used cars and trucks in operating condition. 
(15)  Bus terminals, railroad terminals and freight terminals, except truck terminals. 
(16)  Wholesale businesses, including display and storage. 
(17)  Tire retreading and recapping establishments, provided that no building for such use shall have any opening, other than stationary windows, within 100 feet of a residential district. 
(Code 2002, § 34-97; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.5; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2)) 
Sec. 38-109. - I Industrial. 
The following uses are permitted in the I district: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Carpentry, plumbing and painting shops. 
(3)  Construction and contractor's yards. 
(4)  Storage or warehousing facilities. 
(5)  Service businesses. 
(6)  Wholesale businesses. 
(7)  Building materials storage or wholesaling. 
(8)  Lumber yards. 
(9)  Broadcasting towers. 
(10)  Truck terminals. 
(11)  Bottling plants and dairy products processing plants. 
(12)  Petroleum products storage and sales. 
(13)  Automotive, farm implement, mobile home and trailer sales, service and repair. 
(14)  Grain and feed storage. 
(15)  Heating fuel or building material storage and/or wholesaling, provided that the materials shall not be extracted or processed on the premises. 
(16)  Public utility installations and lands. 
(17)  Assembly of parts for production of finished equipment. 
(18)  Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, repair or servicing of any product or commodity. 
(19)  Research institutions and laboratories. 
(20)  Animal hospitals and veterinarian clinics with kennels. 
(21)  Cold storage plants. 
(22)  Laundry and dry cleaning plants. 
(23)  Drive-in theaters. 
(24)  Banks and lending institutions. 
(25)  Restaurants and drive-in restaurants. 
(26)  Greenhouses and florist shops. 
(27)  Off-street parking and loading for vehicles in operating condition. 
(28)  Junkyards, including automobile wrecking or salvage yards, when completely enclosed by a solid fence having a minimum height of six feet, but in no case less than such height as will screen all operations from view, and located no closer than 200 feet to a residential zoning district. Said solid fence shall be at least 25 feet from any street or highway right-of-way. 
(29)  Sexually oriented businesses. 
(Code 2002, § 34-98; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 7.6; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2); Ord. No. 09-05, 10-14-2009) 
Secs. 38-110—38-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-132. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements for zoning districts and mobile home parks are set out below: 

 
(Code 2002, § 34-121; Ord. of 2-10-2003, art. VI; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2); Ord. of 3-14-2006) 
Secs. 38-133—38-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-163. - Accessory buildings. 
The location of accessory buildings and uses in residential districts shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building, or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof and, therefore, subject to the requirements applicable to the main building. 
(2)  A detached accessory building shall not be closer than ten feet to the main building, nor closer than five feet to the lot line. 
(3)  A detached accessory building not more than two stories in height may be constructed on not more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(4)  No detached accessory building may be located on the front yard of a lot, nor the side yards except for detached garages. 
(Code 2002, § 34-141; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.1) 
Sec. 38-164. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district and shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(Code 2002, § 34-142; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.2) 
Sec. 38-165. - Day care centers. 
Any dwelling acting as a part-time or full-time day care center must be approved by the local board of health and those serving five or more children under 18 years of age for pay must meet the requirements set forth by the state department of human resources. All centers must have a fenced area of at least four feet in height that encloses the area where the children are to be allowed outside. 
(Code 2002, § 34-143; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.3) 
Sec. 38-166. - Cemeteries. 
(a)  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. 
(b)  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than five acres. 
(c)  All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(d)  All graves or burial lots shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway or freeway right-of-way line. 
(e)  The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(Code 2002, § 34-144; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.4) 
Sec. 38-167. - Manufactured (mobile) homes. 
(a)  The lot area and dimensions must meet the requirements of a single-family dwelling unit within the district in which the mobile home unit is located. 
(b)  In no case shall the unit be located within 30 feet of any permanent principal building. 
(c)  The mobile home unit must be supported under all exterior walls by a permanent foundation, completely enclosing the undercarriage, and must be connected to all available public facilities or have an approved water and sewerage system by the county board of health. 
(d)  Mobile homes placed subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall have a front porch not less than five feet by seven feet, a rear porch not less than four feet by six feet, and shall have steps and handrails around the porches and steps. 
(e)  A single mobile home may be used for an office in the subdivision by the developer, temporary residence during construction of permanent residency, or for other special purposes, for a period not to exceed six months upon written approval from the building inspector. 
(Code 2002, § 34-145; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.5; Ord. of 10-12-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 38-168. - Pre-owned manufactured (mobile) homes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by subsections (c)(1)a and b of this section reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. The term "install" includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the city. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(b)  Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(c)  Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of subsection (d) of section; 
c.  A $1,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $1,000.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(4)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $35.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged the estimated value of work plus two inspections for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(d)  Minimum health and safety standards. All preowned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401—5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical systems. Switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc., shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(3)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(f)  Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine according to the general penalties provision of this Code. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010, § 2(145.1)) 
Sec. 38-169. - Mobile home parks. 
(a)  The minimum lot area per park shall be 320,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width for that portion used for entrance and exit shall be 50 feet. The minimum lot width for that portion containing mobile home spaces or stands shall be 40 feet. 
(b)  The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be 30 spaces. The minimum area for each mobile home space or stand shall be 3,500 square feet. 
(c)  No space shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such park except for periods of 30 days or more. No mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including stores, laundry and dry cleaning establishments and pick-up laundry and dry cleaning agencies, and beauty shops and barbershops may be permitted in mobile home parks, provided that such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations: 
(1)  Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park; 
(2)  Shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park; 
(3)  Shall be located, designed and intended to serve frequent trade or service needs or persons residing in the park; and 
(4)  Shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character from any portion of any residential district outside the park. 
(Code 2002, § 34-146; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.6) 
Sec. 38-170. - Travel trailer parks. 
In any district where travel trailer parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit a layout of the park, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No travel trailer park shall be located without direct access to a county, state or federal highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet for that portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, nor require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
(2)  The minimum lot area per park shall be three acres. 
(3)  Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers, provided they meet any additional laws and ordinances of the city council, and shall be rented by the day or week only. An occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period of not more than 30 days. 
(4)  Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses, provided: 
a.  Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park; 
b.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park; and 
c.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character that would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
(5)  No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway or collector street, or of any minor street. 
(6)  A certificate of approval of the county board of health shall accompany the travel trailer park site plan. 
(Code 2002, § 34-147; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 9.7) 
Sec. 38-171. - Planned unit development. 
(a)  Development plan. The development plan shall be the zoning control document for features depicted graphically. The site plan requirement applicable to rezoning requests shall be adhered to for PUD rezoning requests. A site plan shall become the development plan if the request to rezone is approved without changes or additions. If the approval by the city council differs in any way from what is depicted on the site plan submitted for the purpose of seeking rezoning, a revised plan must be certified by the city council before related development permits may be issued. A site plan or development plan shall not substitute for plans which are required as a prerequisite for applying for development related permits. The location of all use areas shall be shown on the development plan, and location on the ground shall be as shown on the development plan. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum PUD size: 20 contiguous acres. 
(2)  Maximum density: 
a.  Single-family: Five units per gross acre. 
b.  Townhomes: Eight units per gross acre. 
(3)  All other standards shall be as specified in the development chapter (chapter 20) and elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-148; Ord. of 4-11-2005(2)) 
Secs. 38-172—38-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 38-196. - General requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building to be served. The location of off-street parking facilities for other than one- and two-family dwellings shall not be more than 300 feet distant measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway. 
(b)  Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. Such facility shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, the term "off-street parking space" shall consist of an area of not less than 200 square feet exclusive of driveways and maneuvering areas permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a driveway. 
(d)  For the purposes of this article, the term "off-street loading space" shall consist of a space having direct access to an alley or street and having the following minimum dimensions: 
(1)  Length: 35 feet; 
(2)  Width: 12 feet; 
(3)  Vertical clearance : 14 feet. 
(e)  Areas reserved for off-street parking or loading in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent off-street parking or loading space is provided. 
(f)  For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use specifically mentioned in this section shall apply. 
(Code 2002, § 34-161; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 10.1) 
Sec. 38-197. - Off-street parking requirements. 
At the time of the erection of any building or structure, there shall be provided off-street parking spaces with adequate provision for ingress and egress by an automobile of standard size, in accordance with the schedule below. When a building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling rooms, guestrooms, floor area or seats, minimum off-street parking shall be provided for such additional rooms, floor area or seats. 

 
(Code 2002, § 34-162; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 10.2) 
Sec. 38-198. - Off-street loading spaces. 
Every building used for business, trade or industry shall provide spaces as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if no alley is accessible, to a public street. Such spaces shall be provided with maneuvering and turning areas so that no vehicle will be required to back into a street, and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use with which associated as set forth below. 

 
(Code 2002, § 34-163; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 10.3) 
Sec. 38-199. - Continuing character of obligation. 
Required off-street parking and loading spaces associated with newly erected or altered buildings or newly established uses of land shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of said building or land, so long as the structure or use exists or its use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It shall be unlawful for said owner to change the required vehicle parking or loading spaces apart from the discontinuance, sale or transfer of the building or use without establishing alternative vehicle parking or loading spaces which meet the requirements of, and are in compliance with, this article, or for any person to use a building or lot without providing vehicle parking or loading spaces which meet the requirements of, and are in compliance with, this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-164; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 10.4) 
Secs. 38-200—38-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 38-222. - Applicability. 
In order to avoid individual hardship whenever reasonable and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city, the provisions of this article apply to all zoning districts. 
(Code 2002, § 34-191; Ord. of 2-10-2003, art. IX) 
Sec. 38-223. - Continuance. 
The lawful use of any building or lot existing at the time of the enactment of this article may be continued, except as hereafter provided, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-192; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.1) 
Sec. 38-224. - Unsafe or unsanitary buildings. 
Any building or portion thereof declared unsafe or unsanitary by a proper authority shall be governed by the ordinance concerning unsafe buildings. 
(Code 2002, § 34-193; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.2) 
Sec. 38-225. - Restoration. 
No building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-194; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.3) 
Sec. 38-226. - Abandonment. 
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, such use shall not thereafter be re-established, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-195; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.4) 
Sec. 38-227. - Change to another nonconforming use not allowed. 
No nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(Code 2002, § 34-196; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.5) 
Sec. 38-228. - Changes. 
Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(Code 2002, § 34-197; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.6) 
Sec. 38-229. - Enlargement. 
No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in any way. 
(Code 2002, § 34-198; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.7) 
Sec. 38-230. - Discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses of land shall be discontinued within five years from the date the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective, or within five years from the date the use becomes nonconforming, whichever is later, in the following situations: 
(1)  Where no buildings are used in connection with the principal use. 
(2)  Where the only buildings used are accessory or incidental to the principal use. 
(3)  Where the use is maintained in connection with a building originally constructed for a conforming use. 
(Code 2002, § 34-199; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 11.8) 
Secs. 38-231—38-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 38-254. - Lot of record. 
In any residential zoning district where the owner of a lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or his successor in title thereto, does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot area or frontage requirements of this article, such lot may be used for a one-family dwelling, provided that minimum yard and building setback requirements for the zoning district in which said lot is located are maintained. 
(Code 2002, § 34-221; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 12.1) 
Sec. 38-255. - Combination of adjoining and vacant lots of record. 
If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and such lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the zoning district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall together be considered as a single lot, or shall be grouped into several lots of minimum permitted size, and the resulting lot or lots shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-222; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 12.2) 
Sec. 38-256. - Reduction in building setback line. 
The building setback requirements of this article for dwelling shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 200 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and in the same zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required building setback. In such cases, the minimum building setback on said lot may be equal to the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or not less than ten feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(Code 2002, § 34-223; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 12.3) 
Sec. 38-257. - Yards in group developments. 
More than one dwelling, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot in a zoning district where such a use would be permitted, but no such building shall encroach upon the front, side or rear yards required for any other building side. For dwellings, the open space between buildings shall not be less than 20 feet for one-story buildings, 30 feet when either building is a two-story building, 40 feet when either building is a three-story building, and 40 feet plus an additional ten feet for each story over three stories when either building is over three stories in height. The minimum dimension for the yard upon which any entrance or exit of a dwelling faces shall be 20 feet, and such space shall not be counted as a yard for any other building. 
(Code 2002, § 34-224; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 12.4) 
Secs. 38-258—38-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-278. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the mayor and city council with the assistance of the building inspector or his designee. The building inspector's duties in this capacity shall include inspection of premises, and issuing building and occupancy permits for uses and buildings that meet the requirements of this and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 34-241; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.1) 
Sec. 38-279. - Building permits. 
Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Building permit required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for construction of any building, or to commence construction of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until the building inspector or his designee has issued a building permit for such work. 
(2)  Issuance of building permit. In applying to the building inspector or his designee for a building permit, the applicant shall submit two copies of a dimensioned sketch or to-scale plan signed by the owner or his authorized agent, indicating the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon, and the shape, size, heights, uses and location of the buildings to be erected, demolished, altered or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any, the setback lines of buildings or adjoining lots, and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city then in force are met. When all requirements have been met, the building inspector or his designee shall issue a building permit upon payment of any required fees, and shall retain one copy of the building permit and the sketch or plan. 
(3)  Refusal of building permit. If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this article, the building inspector or his designee shall not issue a building permit, but shall return the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. Such refusal shall state the reasons therefor, and shall cite the portions of this article with which the submitted sketch or plan does not comply. The building inspector or his designee shall retain one copy of the sketch or plan and of the refusal. 
(4)  Time limitations. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Code 2002, § 34-242; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.2) 
Sec. 38-280. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy required. Certificates of occupancy issued by the building inspector are required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  A building hereafter erected. 
b.  A building hereafter altered. 
c.  A change of use of any building or lot. 
(2)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The building inspector shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of a lot or a building, as stated on the occupancy permit and signed by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this article and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the building permit. One copy of all certificates of occupancy issued, which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property signed by the owner or his agent, shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. Copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or lot involved, at said person's expense. 
(3)  Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or lot conforms to the applicable provisions of this article, or unless the building as finally constructed complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued, and otherwise conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 34-243; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.3) 
Sec. 38-281. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector or his designee to keep a record of all building permits and occupancy permits issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available for the use of the city council, the board of zoning appeals, the planning commission and other officials of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 34-244; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.4) 
Sec. 38-282. - Penalties. 
Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 34-245; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.5) 
Sec. 38-283. - Remedies. 
In case any building is created, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or lot is used in violation of this article, the building inspector, or any other appropriate city authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent such violation in the case of each such building or use. 
(Code 2002, § 34-246; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 13.6) 
Secs. 38-284—38-314. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 38-315. - Establishment. 
The city council may from time to time establish a board of appeals, as needed. Said board shall consist of three members appointed by the mayor and city council. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointments. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in the county, except that one member shall also be a member of the city planning commission. 
(Code 2002, § 34-271; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.1) 
Sec. 38-316. - Procedure. 
The board of appeals shall elect a chairperson from its membership who shall serve for one year or until he is re-elected or his successor is elected. The board of appeals shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or a member of the planning commission. The board of appeals shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair, and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair or, in his absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 2002, § 34-272; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.2) 
Sec. 38-317. - Appeals; how taken. 
Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of appeals, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken. 
(Code 2002, § 34-273; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.3) 
Sec. 38-318. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board of appeals or by a competent court. 
(Code 2002, § 34-274; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.4) 
Sec. 38-319. - Notice. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days' public notice thereof by advertisement at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The foregoing provisions for notice shall apply to requests for variance, special exceptions and appeals of error which are hereinafter provided for in section 38-320. 
(Code 2002, § 34-275; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.5) 
Sec. 38-320. - Requests for variance, special exception or appeal of error. 
Requests for variance, special exception or appeal of error shall be filed in writing with the building inspector or his designee. Within ten days after receiving a request for variance, the building inspector or his designee shall: 
(1)  Send the request, with any comments he may deem necessary added thereto, to the board of zoning appeals or, if one has not been established, the city council; and 
(2)  Cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs at the expense of the person from whom the appeal is taken. Each sign shall be not less than 12 square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearings before the board of zoning appeals or city council. Such time shall be not less than 15 days after the posting of such sign or signs. 
(Code 2002, § 34-276; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.6) 
Sec. 38-321. - Powers. 
The board of zoning appeals, or, in its absence, the city council, shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will, in an individual case, result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the regulation shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board that all of the following exist: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this article to this particular piece of property would create practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and 
c.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. However, no variance may be granted for a use of land or buildings or structure that is prohibited by this article. 
(3)  Exceptions. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of appeals is required to pass under. 
(Code 2002, § 34-277; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.7) 
Sec. 38-322. - Decision-making function. 
In exercising the above powers, the board of zoning appeals or city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue and direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 2002, § 34-278; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.8) 
Sec. 38-323. - Appeal from decision. 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals or city council, may take an appeal to the superior court. Said appeal to the superior court shall be the same as an appeal to the superior court from any decision made by the court of the ordinary and as specified in O.C.G.A. title 5, ch. 4, except, however, that said appeal must be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the board of zoning appeals. Upon failure to file said appeal within 30 days, the decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be final; provided, however, that on appeal said case shall be heard by the judge of the superior court without a jury trial within 30 days from the filing of the appeal. 
(Code 2002, § 34-279; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 14.9) 
Secs. 38-324—38-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 38-350. - Authority to amend. 
(a)  The mayor and council may from time to time amend any article or section of this chapter by adopting an amendment to the zoning chapter which changes: 
(1)  The text of the zoning chapter to change the number, shape, boundary or area of any district, to amend any regulation pertaining to a zoning district or any procedure relating thereto; or 
(2)  By the adoption of an amendment to the zoning chapter which rezones property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification authorized by the zoning chapter. 
(b)  An amendment to the zoning chapter, whether for the purpose of amending the text of the zoning chapter or to rezone property from one zoning classification to another, shall be by adoption of an amendatory ordinance in accordance with the ordinance procedure set forth in the Charter and this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(2), § 1(34-301)) 
Sec. 38-351. - Initiation of zoning amendments. 
(a)  An application to amend the zoning chapter to amend the zoning map and rezone property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification may be made by the mayor or any member of the council, or by any person, firm or corporation owning all or any part of the real estate covered by and included in such request for amendment. 
(b)  Any amendment to the zoning chapter other than to rezone property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification may be proposed only by the mayor or any member of the council. 
(c)  If an application to rezone property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification is defeated by the mayor and council, the same property may not be again considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat the rezoning by the local government. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(2), § 1(34-302)) 
Sec. 38-352. - Filing applications for amendment. 
All applications for amendment to the zoning chapter of the city shall be filed with the city clerk or his designee, and unless the application is made by the mayor or any member of the council, all fees required by the resolution or ordinances of the city shall be paid at the time of such filing. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(2), § 1(34-303)) 
Sec. 38-353. - Public hearing. 
At the public hearing required by law prior to the adoption of a zoning amendment, the mayor and council shall: 
(1)  Receive a report from the mayor as to any comments for or against the proposal received by the city and hear any comments from the city staff; 
(2)  Hear from the applicants for the rezoning; and 
(3)  Hear from the opponents to the rezoning. 
a.  Proponents of the proposed zoning amendment shall have a minimum of ten minutes for the presentation of data, evidence and opinions relating to the zoning decision and opponents of such proposed zoning decision shall have an equal minimum time period for presentation of opposition as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5(a). 
b.  Any local government official (which shall be deemed to include any member of the mayor and council) shall make the disclosure of financial interest required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-2. Any applicant for rezoning action and any opponent of a rezoning action must file the disclosure report of campaign contributions required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3. The disclosure required from an applicant for rezoning action shall be filed within ten days after the application for the rezoning action is first filed and any opponent must file the disclosure at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the mayor and council or any of its agencies. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(2), § 1(34-304)) 
Sec. 38-354. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the city clerk or his designee shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the corporate limits of the city a notice of the hearing which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the proposed zoning amendment is to rezone property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification, the notice shall also include the location of the property and the present and proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(b)  If the proposed amendment is to rezone property from one zoning classification to another zoning classification, the city clerk or his designee shall cause a sign to be placed upon the property for which the rezoning is sought. Such sign shall be placed upon such property at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. The sign shall have surface of not less than 16 inches in height and 20 inches in width and the printing thereon shall be black with a light background and the letters shall be at least 1½ inches tall. The sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property and must be visible from at least one street upon which the property abuts or on the access to such property and shall state the proposed zoning amendment, the date of the public hearing and shall contain a telephone number to call for further information relating to such proposed rezoning. 
(c)  The sign placed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not be removed therefrom by any person, firm or corporation until at least 24 hours after the date scheduled for the public hearing or if the public hearing is postponed or rescheduled, not less than 24 hours after the rescheduled date of such hearing and then such removal shall be accomplished only by the city clerk or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to demolish, tear down, obliterate or remove a sign placed upon property in the city for the purpose of giving notice of a public hearing on a proposed rezoning other than the city clerk or his authorized designee. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions hereof shall upon conviction be punished by order of the city as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012(2), § 1(34-305)) 
Secs. 38-355—38-381. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - STANDARDS GOVERNING THE EXERCISE OF THE ZONING POWER 

Sec. 38-382. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the following standards are to set forth the factors which shall be considered by the city council in balancing the interest of promoting the public health, safety, morality and the general welfare against the right of individuals to the unrestricted use of their property. 
(Code 2002, § 34-331; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 16.1) 
Sec. 38-383. - Standards. 
The standards to be considered are: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  The extent to which the diminution of the property value of the zoned area promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as presently zoned compared to the development and use of other property in the area; 
(7)  The consistency of the proposed use of the property with the overall land use plan of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 34-332; Ord. of 2-10-2003, § 16.2) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2002 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code, as updated through March 13, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter (if included) and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia Law. 

 