CODE OF ORDINANCES GORDON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted April 7, 1992 
Effective April 7, 1992 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of 
GORDON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Becky Hood 
Chairman 
____________ 
Kevin Cunningham 
Becky Hood 
M.L. Bud Owens 
Norris Sexton 
Chad Steward 
Commissioners 
____________ 
John King 
County Administrator 
____________ 
James Ledbetter 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Annette Berry 
County Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of 
GORDON COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Richard R. Montanaro 
Chairman 
____________ 
Gerald Brown 
Everett L. DeFoor 
Billy Mauldin 
Joe R. Powell 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Theresia McDearis 
County Administrator 
____________ 
J. C. Maddox 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Pat James 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Gordon County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the disposition table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Ellis Hite, former Chairman of the Board of Commissioners, Mr. Eddie Peterson, former County Administrator, Mr. J. C. Maddox, County Attorney, and Ms. Theresia McDearis, former County Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Gordon County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Gordon County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 15, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the county shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the board to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 15, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 7, 1992. 
Passed and Adopted by the Board of Commissioners this 7th day of April, 1992. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Gordon County, Georgia," and may be so cited. It may also be referred to as the "Gordon County Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - General rules of construction; definitions. 
In the construction of this Code, the definitions and rules of construction in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners. 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, which shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(b). 
Board, board of commissioners. The term "board" or "board of commissioners" shall mean the board of commissioners of Gordon County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday provided for in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Gordon County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize him to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Fee, charge, rate, deposit. The word "fee," "charge," "rate" or "deposit" shall mean a fee, charge, rate or deposit set from time to time by the board of commissioners and kept on file in the office of the board. 
Following. The word "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(5). 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(11). 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(6). 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." shall mean the current official codification of Georgia laws, as amended. 
Officers, departments, etc. Whenever titles of various officers, departments or other agencies are used, they shall refer to such officers, departments or agencies of Gordon County, Georgia. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to organizations, associations, clubs, societies, companies, proprietorships, firms, partnerships, either general or limited, joint ventures, trusts, and bodies politic and/or corporate, as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— "Person" defined, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding. The word "preceding" shall mean next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether it is privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— "May" defined, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
State Law reference— "Sidewalk" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(52). 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(58). 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(7). 
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
Writing. The word "writing" shall include printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Sec. 1-3. - Statutory rules of construction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing provisions of this Code, and other ordinances of this county, as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1—1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given words found in the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; headings of articles and divisions. 
The catchlines of the sections of this Code and the headings of articles and divisions thereof are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents and shall not be deemed to be titles, nor as any part of the section, article or division, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, articles or divisions, including the catchlines and headings, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing on the adoption date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code, and of codes or other provisions adopted by reference herein, are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code and provisions adopted by reference, nor the application thereof to other persons or circumstances, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation therein of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq., 36-1-20; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; nuisances, O.C.G.A. Tit. 41. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the county; 
(5)  Any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments therefor; 
(6)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations; 
(7)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to the investment of county funds; 
(9)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, retirement and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to subdivisions or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county; 
(11)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, closing, prescribing grades, etc., of streets, roads, bridges and other public ways; 
(12)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, establishing fees, rates, deposits, service charges or other charges; 
(13)  Any ordinance creating, establishing, prescribing or abolishing urban renewal projects; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones; 
(15)  Any ordinance continuing in force and effect local constitutional amendments; 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution relating to civil defense or emergency management. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Unlawful alteration of Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner (except by ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners or the General Assembly) which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented. 
State Law reference— False writings and documents, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments; new provisions. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein. A reference to this Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Gordon County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Gordon County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or division or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which reads as follows:…." The new section (or division or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or parts thereof included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize ordinances and resolutions into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinances incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance or resolution sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference— Effective date of legislative acts, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-4. 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinance or resolution in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed, nor any right acquired or liability incurred under any ordinance or resolution repealed. 
State Law reference— Operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, Ch. 5; personnel, Ch. 10; planning and development, Ch. 11; roads and highways, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 16; wastewater, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 18; public nuisance officer, § 9-27; administration and enforcement of personnel policies, § 10-5; development authority, § 11-2; planning commission, § 11-26 et seq.; enforcement of soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, § 14-6; administration of motel-hotel tax ordinance, § 16-34. 
State Constitution reference— Counties and municipal corporations, Art. IX; home rule for counties, Art. IX, § II, Par. I. 
State Law reference— County government, O.C.G.A. Title 36, Ch. 1 et seq.; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50; board of commissioners of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; workers' compensation for employees of political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Workers' compensation coverage of certain officials. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties, the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, magistrate judge, state court judge, volunteer firemen and coroner shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. 
(Res. of 11-17-87, § I) 
Sec. 2-2. - Office of purchasing agent established. 
The office of purchasing agent is hereby established. 
(Mo. of 2-19-85) 
State Law reference— Public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq.; bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq.; competition for public work bids, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-84-1, 36-84-2; local political subdivision purchases through the state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; contract for acquisition or lease of property of United States, O.C.G.A. § 50-16-81. 
Sec. 2-3. - Standards of conduct for contracts, expenditures. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted a standard of conduct which shall govern officers, employees or agents of the county in contracting with and expending P. L.-566, F.P. and R.C. & D. Funds. Such standards of conduct are as follows: 
(1)  No official, employee or agent of the county shall solicit or accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from any contractor or potential contractor. 
(2)  No contract shall be awarded to any person in whom any official of the county or any member of the official's immediate family has a direct or indirect interest in the recurring profits or contracts of such person. 
(b)  Any official, agent or employee of the county who knowingly violates these standards of conduct shall be dismissed from his official capacity. 
(Res. of 9-22-76, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 2-4. - County ordinance officer. 
The office of county ordinance officer is hereby established. Such officer shall enforce the laws or ordinances relating to litter, nuisances and dangerous dogs and shall have such additional responsibilities as may be assigned to him. 
(Mo. of 3-21-89) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 9-26 et seq.; litter control, § 15-61 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5. - Defense of officers and employees against claims, suits. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the county to defend its officers and employees against civil claims and judgments, and to satisfy same either through insurance or otherwise, unless it is determined that the officer or employee wilfully: 
(1)  Acts or fails to act because of actual fraud, corruption or actual malice; 
(2)  Acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, his own self-indulgence substantially impaired his judgment (as, for example, an officer or employee who causes damage or injury while intoxicated or under influence of drugs while on the job); 
(3)  Acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to instructions from his superiors, or directly contrary to advice of the county attorney; or 
(4)  Acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a criminal act (as, for example, misappropriation of property or funds). 
(b)  The county administrator or his designee shall determine whether or not a claim or suit filed against an officer or employee meets the requirements specified herein for providing a defense for such officer or employee. 
(c)  The board of commissioners, pursuant to the standards herein set forth, shall determine whether or not a claim or judgment entered against an officer or employee shall be paid by the county. 
(d)  The terms "officer" and "employee" as used herein shall mean: 
(1)  Present or past officers or employees who might now or hereafter have claims or judgments filed or entered against them. 
(2)  Any and all persons appointed by the board of commissioners to serve on any board, commission or authority, excluding only members of tthe county hospital authority. 
(e)  The policies specified herein shall not be applicable unless notice of the claim or suit is given to the county through the county administrator or county attorney prior to the time the claim is settled or civil suit is litigated and judgment is entered, except as to any claim now existing on the effective date of the resolution from which this provision derives. 
(f)  This section shall not be interpreted in any way to relieve any insurance company of its obligation under any insurance policy to protect the interests of any insured under the policy, or to reduce or eliminate the rights of any officer or employee of the county against any other party. Further, except as expressly stated herein, this section is not to be interpreted as a waiver of any rights the county has against any party. 
(Res. of 8-6-81; Res. of 8-18-81) 
Secs. 2-6—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-31. - Establishment of program. 
The board of commissioners does adopt and utilize the rules and regulations outlined in the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.) as a basis for establishing a records management program in and for the county. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-32. - Adoption of statewide common standards. 
The statewide General Common Standards which are applicable to county records and approved by the county records committee are hereby implemented and made the common standards of the county. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-33. - Position of records management officer created. 
The position of records management officer is hereby created. The records management officer shall administer a records management program for the county under the direction of the county records committee. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-34. - Administration. 
The board of commissioners is responsible for the administration of the records management program. The records management officer for the county will act for and in behalf of the county in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-35. - Records committee; created, composition, duty. 
There is hereby created a records committee consisting of the probate court judge, the clerk of the superior court, the county clerk, and the records management officer. It is the duty of the records committee to review and recommend approval, disapproval or modification of records retention schedules to the board of commissioners. Review of records retention schedules will be based upon legal, fiscal, administrative and historical retention requirements. The records management officer shall serve as chairman of this committee, and the final approval authority shall be the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-36. - Annual budget. 
The county records committee shall prepare and submit a budget request to the board of commissioners as required by county local legislation. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-37. - Archival depository. 
An archival depository will be selected to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-38. - Storage in records center; alteration, destruction of records. 
(a)  A centralized records center shall be established and all records not required for day-to-day office operation shall be transferred to the records center until destroyed in accordance with the approved records retention schedule. 
(b)  No record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-39. - Activities, duties of records management officer. 
(a)  The records management officer shall act for the county records committee in matters of: 
(1)  Establishing and maintaining an active and continuing program for the economical, efficient and effective management of records; 
(2)  Developing and issuing rules, procedures and regulations subject to review by the county records committee, the department of archives and history, and the state records committee; 
(3)  Establishing standards for economical, efficient management relating to the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposition of records, filing and copying equipment, supplies, microfilming of records, and vital records programs; 
(4)  Assisting the head of each county administrative office and the office of each county elected public official in developing and implementing a program of records management; 
(5)  Implementing records management procedures and regulations approved by the county records committee; 
(6)  Developing a records management center program. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the records management officer to: 
(1)  Direct the records management program to achieve efficient and economical management practices relating to the creation, maintenance, utilization, retention, preservation and disposition of records, filing equipment, microfilm equipment, supplies, microfilming of records and vital records; 
(2)  Assist in the scheduling of records, develop a records control schedule for the county and maintain the schedule on a current basis; 
(3)  Supervise implementation of records retention schedule; 
(4)  Supervise physical transfer of records from high-cost office space to low-cost records center or an archival depository; 
(5)  Conduct a microfilm program and supervise a county microfilm laboratory; 
(6)  Develop and supervise a program for the training of records management assistants and filing personnel; 
(7)  Prepare and submit reports of status and progress of the records management program to the county records committee; 
(8)  Review, evaluate and recommend more efficient paperwork that will simplify operations throughout all offices of the county; 
(9)  Conduct surveys to determine the most efficient and economical filing systems and filing equipment for use by the county; 
(10)  Recommend the selection and utilization of filing equipment and supplies. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-40. - Duties of department heads. 
It shall be the duty of the head of each administrative office of the county to: 
(1)  Cooperate fully with the county records committee and the records management officer in complying with the provisions of this article and the provisions of the state records act; 
(2)  Cause to be made and preserve records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization policies, decisions, procedures and essential transactions of the office and designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the county and of persons directly affected by the office's activities; 
(3)  Implement records management procedures and regulations issued by the county records committee and the records management officer in conjunction with the department of archives and history and the state records committee; 
(4)  Submit to the records management officer, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state records committee, a recommended disposition standard for each records series in his custody; 
(5)  Establish necessary safeguards against the removal or loss of records and such further safeguards as may be recommended by the records management officer. Such safeguards shall include notification of all officials and personnel that county records are public property and as such shall constitute a record of public acts. Further, that such records shall not be placed in the custody of private or semipublic institutions or turned over to private individuals, and that no records in the custody of a county office are to be destroyed or otherwise alienated except in accordance with the provisions of the state records act. 
(Res. of 7-12-88) 
Secs. 2-41—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES 

Sec. 2-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Expense means: 
(1)  Expense for personal vehicle travel. 
(2)  Expense for meals. 
(3)  Expense for lodging. 
(4)  Expense for common carriers such as taxis, airplane, MARTA. 
(5)  Expense miscellaneous to include registration, parking, etc. 
Individual means: 
(1)  Employees of the county. 
(2)  Members of the county board of commissioners. 
(3)  Other elected officials: 
a.  Tax commissioner; 
b.  Clerk of superior court; 
c.  Judge of probate court; 
d.  Judge of magistrate court; 
e.  Sheriff. 
(4)  Any other person assigned to perform a specific task for the county. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89, § I) 
Sec. 2-62. - Policy statement. 
It is the policy of the county to reimburse individuals who incur expense while performing official duties for the county, and other assigned activities. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89) 
Sec. 2-63. - Travel. 
(a)  Eligible travelers include employees of Gordon County, members of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, constitutional officers and other elected officials, certain independent contractors engaged by Gordon County to perform specific tasks, and appointed boards, agencies or task group members performing in the official capacity of their jobs. 
(b)  Travel costs will not be paid or reimbursed unless a travel request form has been submitted and approved in advance. Travel request forms must be completed in [their] entirety before approval can be granted, and will be returned without consideration, until the form has been properly completed. 
(c)  A designated copy of the form shall be attached and resubmitted with the reimbursement expense form by the traveler when claiming expense reimbursement. 
(d)  When checks are needed in advance for specific items such as lodging or registration, a request for payment form (check request form) must be completed and approved for payment by the department head and submitted with the travel request form. 
(e)  An accurate estimate of all travel related costs must be presented on the travel request form. Any other expense that may be incurred should be included in the other expense spaces provided on the travel request form with adequate explanation. 
(f)  The reimbursement expense form must be submitted for payment within ninety (90) days from the date that the traveler returns. A reasonable explanation of substantial deviations between the cost estimates on the travel request form and the actual expenses on the reimbursement expense form must accompany the reimbursement expense form when claiming reimbursement. The burden of explanation and substantiation of all expenses is the responsibility of the traveler. 
(g)  Travelers shall comply with established policies, rules, and procedures in order for travel costs to be eligible for payment or reimbursement. The traveler is considered to forfeit his right for reimbursement upon failure to adhere. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89, § II; Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-64. - Meals. 
(a)  A maximum of thirty dollars ($30.00) per day, plus tips, per traveler will be allowed to cover the cost of meals for all overnight trips. Reimbursements for tips will not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the cost of the meal and will only be made for meals at restaurants that would ordinarily require tips and will not be made for meals at fast food restaurants. Receipts that detail expenses for meals and beverages must be attached and submitted with the expense reimbursement form. No payment or reimbursements for alcoholic beverages will be allowed. No reimbursements will be made without detailed receipts for each meal. 
(b)  In cases in which the total actual meal expense for one (1) day is less than thirty dollars ($30.00), the remaining balance cannot be carried forward or applied to another day's meal expense that exceeds thirty dollars ($30.00). No cash advances will be made for meal expenses. Costs that exceed the thirty dollar ($30.00) per day threshold must be repaid to Gordon County by the employee, or shall be borne by the employee. 
(c)  Reimbursements for costs of day trips not involving overnight travel will be permitted, and the day trip meal allowance shall not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) per day, plus tips, per traveler. Travel must be outside the boundaries of Gordon County in the official capacity of employment in order for a meal to be eligible for reimbursement. 
(d)  Trips must depart from Gordon County prior to 7:00 a.m. in order for breakfast to be eligible for reimbursement. Return trips must arrive back in Gordon County after 7:00 p.m. in order for the evening meal to be reimbursed. 
(e)  Meal and other related expenses incurred for the purpose of conducting business for Gordon County while in the geographic area of Gordon County will only be paid or reimbursed on a case-by-case basis, after obtaining prior approval from the department head, finance director, and administrator. A detailed written request should be signed and submitted by the person making the request, and approval confirmed by obtaining the signature of the department head, finance director, and administrator on the request. The expense reimbursement form, along with the approved request and appropriate documentation including detailed receipts must be submitted for payment or reimbursement. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89, § III; Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-65. - Lodging. 
(a)  Lodging shall be paid or reimbursed at the single-room rate, and in cases where the event is being held at a particular hotel or similar facility, the lodging paid or reimbursed shall not exceed the single-room rate at that facility. If an individual chooses accommodations elsewhere, the lodging shall be paid or reimbursed at a rate not to exceed the single-room rate at the hotel where the event is being held. 
(b)  In cases where numerous hotels are approved by the organization holding the event, then lodging shall be paid or reimbursed at a rate not to exceed the highest single-room rate for the hotels on the approved list. 
(c)  Family members are not prohibited from traveling with employees but in no case will expenses directly attributable to family members be paid or reimbursed. 
(d)  No state sales tax or hotel/motel tax for travel within the State of Georgia will be paid or reimbursed. The traveler will be responsible for obtaining a sales tax exemption form and a hotel/motel tax exemption form from the finance department and must submit these forms to hotel management to make certain that no sales tax or hotel/motel tax is billed to Gordon County. 
(f)  It is the traveler's responsibility to see that the transaction is processed properly. In cases where the traveler uses a personal credit card for lodging payment, the expense becomes ineligible for sales tax exemption and/or hotel/motel tax exemption, and the traveler will be held personally responsible for payment of applicable sales tax and/or hotel/motel tax. 
(g)  Exceptions regarding the payment or reimbursement of state sales tax or hotel/motel tax for travel within the State of Georgia will only be made in rare cases in which following the above procedures are not reasonably practical and only upon approval of the finance director and administrator. All applicable taxes for lodging will be paid or reimbursed for travel outside the State of Georgia. 
(h)  If lodging is reserved for an employee, and that employee is for some reason unable to use the lodging, a reasonable effort must be made by the employee to cancel the reservation so that Gordon County is not billed or penalized as a result. All expenses related to cancellation of lodging shall be borne by the traveler unless otherwise approved by the finance director and the administrator, and in no case may the room be paid or reimbursed by Gordon County for the exclusive use of someone other than the approved traveler. 
(i)  Reasonable travel related tips such as for baggage handling at hotels, airports, etc.,and tips to cabbies, bellmen, housekeepers, etc. may be reimbursed and must be reported in detail on the expense reimbursement form in order to be eligible for reimbursement. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89, § IV; Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-66. - Transportation costs. 
(a)  For travel to or from an event outside of Gordon County, a traveler may use a county vehicle and a county credit card for fuel costs or may be reimbursed by providing appropriate receipts for fuel purchases, or the traveler may use a personal vehicle and be reimbursed at the current IRS standard mileage rate in effect. Mileage must be documented using odometer readings from the appropriate vehicle, and must be reasonable given the context of the trip. Travelers must insure that the vehicle is filled at Gordon County's fuel farm before departing on any trip to minimize the purchase of fuel at retail rates. 
(b)  In cases where the traveler is required or chooses to travel to destinations outside the State of Georgia, the maximum travel cost paid or reimbursed for travel to and from that destination shall not exceed an amount equivalent to one thousand (1,000) miles multiplied by the IRS standard mileage rate in effect. Regardless of mode of travel, travel costs will not be paid or reimbursed in excess of this threshold. Any amount exceeding the above threshold will be the personal responsibility of the traveler. 
(c)  Travel costs for taxis, or use of other common carriers and parking may be paid or reimbursed when reasonable and necessary for travel involved in the general event area. Expenses must be reported in detail on the expense reimbursement form and appropriate documentation submitted when available. Use of rental cars may be paid or reimbursed after obtaining prior approval from the finance director and administrator. 
(d)  In cases in which multiple employees travel to the same event, every effort should be made to share transportation when reasonably possible. When an employee chooses not to share transportation, the employee assumes responsibility for the cost of transportation and those costs will not be paid or reimbursed by Gordon County. 
(Mo. of 2-7-89; Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-67. - Telephones. 
Telephone calls made by travelers for the purpose of conducting business for Gordon County may be paid or reimbursed. Expenses must be reported in detail on the expense reimbursement form and appropriate documentation submitted. In no case, will personal telephone calls be paid or reimbursed. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Secs. 2-68—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-101. - Regular meetings. 
The board shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month. On the first Tuesday of each month, the meeting shall be held in the Gordon County Administration Building conference room at 6:00 p.m. On the third Tuesday of each month, the meeting shall be held in the Gordon County Administration Building conference room at 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1.10; Ord. of 7-20-10, § A; Ord. of 1-15-13, § A) 
Sec. 2-102. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairman of the board of commissioners, known as "the chairman," or by any three (3) commissioners. Any member of the board who wishes to call a special meeting can contact the chairman, so the meeting can be called by the chairman. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting (except emergency meetings). Such notice shall not be required if all board members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a commissioner in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted by the board in such commissioner's presence. Except where waiver by all members is effected by their presence or in writing, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1.12) 
Sec. 2-103. - Notice of special meetings. 
Notice of all special meetings (except emergency meetings) shall be posted on the bulletin board in the county courthouse and the place of the meeting if such meeting is not at the regular meeting place, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of such special meeting. Such notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the special meeting and shall be posted by the clerk of the board of commissioners, known as "the clerk." The clerk shall also contact, by telephone, the following news media and advise each of the time, place and purpose of the meeting: The Calhoun Times, WEBS Radio, and WJTH Radio. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1.13) 
Sec. 2-104. - Emergency meetings. 
To meet a public emergency the board may convene, on call of the chairman or any three (3) commissioners, an emergency meeting. Notice of such emergency meeting to all board members shall be by telephone. The clerk shall contact, by telephone, the following news media and advise each of the time, place and purpose of the meeting: The Calhoun Times, WEBS Radio, and WJTH Radio. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1.14) 
Sec. 2-105. - Public meetings. 
All meetings of the board shall be public to the extent required by general state law (O.C.G.A. 50-14-1 et seq. and O.C.G.A. 50-18-70 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 1.15) 
Sec. 2-106. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Any meeting of the board shall be presided over by the chairman, if present, or the vice-chairman, if the chairman is not present or is otherwise disqualified to preside. A quorum shall exist when any three (3) board members are present at a meeting, and business may be acted on. But if an item of business is voted on, and the vote is two (2) to one (1), that particular business item will have to be addressed when the entire board is in session. 
(b)  No board member should abstain from a vote unless he has a definite conflict of interest with that particular business item. 
(c)  All motions are to be concise, clear, and directly pertaining to the business at hand. 
(d)  No motion may be made on a business item unless that particular item of business is on the agenda to be addressed or by unanimous consent of the members of the board present. 
(e)  Unless a motion receives a second, the motion is dead. 
(f)  The chairman has the option to vote on any motion where he feels that a clarification of his position is necessary. If there is a tie vote the chairman must vote. 
(g)  No motion can be made until the chairman calls for a motion; the chairman will decide when discussion on a business item should be closed, unless by majority vote the board closes debate. 
(h)  Follow Robert's Rules of Order. 
(i)  All members of the board and the members of the audience on the agenda must be recognized by the chairman before they can address the board. Those from the audience who are recognized should state their names so that accurate minutes can be recorded. 
(j)  The clerk of the board or the board's designee shall keep minutes of all proceedings to the extent required by general state law. Voting on all questions, ordinances or resolutions shall be taken by a show of hands and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. The affirmative vote of a majority of the board shall be required for the passage of any question, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, §§ 2.10—2.19; Mo. of 10-3-95) 
Sec. 2-107. - Order of business. 
(a)  For each regular meeting the order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Invocation; 
(3)  Welcome audience; 
(4)  Commissioners' comments; 
(5)  Approval of minutes of previous meetings; 
(6)  Consideration of old business; 
(7)  Consideration of new business; 
(8)  Administrator's report; 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(b)  The order of business may be altered by the chairman at his discretion in order to allow proper consideration and debate of any matter on the agenda. The reading of the minutes of prior meetings may be waived by the unanimous consent of all board members. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, §§ 3.10, 3.11) 
Sec. 2-108. - Agenda. 
(a)  For all regular and special meetings the county administrator shall prepare an agenda. The agenda shall reflect the order of business as stated in section 2-107 above. 
(b)  Any commissioner or citizen may place an item of business on the agenda for consideration, provided the item of business is brought to the attention of the county administrator or county clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the regular meeting on Tuesday. 
(c)  The administrator shall have a completed agenda with all pertinent documents ready for the board by 5:00 p.m. on Friday prior to the regular meeting on Tuesday. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, §§ 4.10—4.12) 
Sec. 2-109. - Public participation. 
The general public is encouraged to attend the meetings of the board of commissioners of the county. A public group or private citizen desiring to have the board consider a matter may appear on the agenda by contacting the administrator or clerk and advising the same that he/she wishes to appear before the board. Public groups are encouraged to appoint or select a spokesperson to present the matter in which they are interested. All presentations to the board shall: 
(1)  Be made from the lectern. 
(2)  Begin by the speaker giving his or her full name and address. 
(3)  Be limited to no more than four (4) minutes, except by permission of a majority of the board. 
(4)  Not engage in debate with members of the board or require answers from individual members of the board. 
(5)  Not make derogatory comment about any individual member of the board. 
(6)  Be of a subject matter pending before the board or a matter the speaker wishes for the board to consider, not on a matter upon which the board has acted. 
(7)  Be presented in a manner to preserve the decorum of the meeting. 
(8)  A speaker violating any of the above procedures shall forfeit his or her remaining time. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 5.10) 
Sec. 2-110. - Ordinance form; procedure; notice; reading. 
Unless otherwise required by general state law, all county ordinances shall be introduced and voted upon as follows: 
(1)  Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. 
(2)  An ordinance may be introduced by any board member. Before an ordinance can be voted on, it should be read twice and posted at the county courthouse during the period between two (2) readings. The first reading should be of the entire ordinance and the second reading, which must take place no sooner than two (2) weeks after the first reading, may be by title only. 
(3)  Upon passage, all ordinances shall be signed by the chairman, or vice-chairman if presiding, and the county clerk and immediately transmitted to be codified. 
(4)  Failure to comply with the technical requirements of this section shall not invalidate an ordinance if the intention of the governing authority that the ordinance be effective is evident. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 6.10) 
Sec. 2-111. - Resolutions and proclamations. 
Resolutions and proclamations may be introduced and adopted at any special or regular meeting of the board. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 7.10) 
Sec. 2-112. - Temporary suspension of rules. 
By unanimous consent of the board of commissioners, any or all of the above rules may be temporarily suspended when "justice" and "fair play" dictate such suspension. Such suspension shall not affect the future validity or enforceability of such rules. 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 8.10) 
Sec. 2-113. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
Any procedure of the board of commissioners not governed by the above rules shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of Order." 
(Ord. of 10-3-95, § 9.10) 
Secs. 2-114—2-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-120. - Organization. 
The authority for centralized purchasing in Gordon County is placed with the county administrator who may delegate a portion of that authority to the purchasing director. The purchasing director may, in turn, authorize employees within the purchasing department or any other department within the county to perform the necessary procedures to procure supplies, materials, equipment, and services. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-121. - Scope. 
This article and these procedures shall apply to all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and services including repairs that involve public funds and to all subsequent dispositions. The purchasing article and procedures herein supersede and repeal all previously existing ordinances and procedures to the extent that they are inconsistent with these provisions. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-122. - Purchases generally. 
All purchases are subject to the purchasing department's approval. The purchasing department reserves the right to deny the purchase of an inappropriate item and may obtain a further review from the director of accounting and/or county administrator. All departments shall use the MUNIS accounting finance system in the purchasing department. Items bought without a purchase order shall be the financial responsibility of the person(s) having made the unauthorized purchase. Special items, such as large fuel purchases, shall not be subject to the traditional sealed bidding process. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-123. - Exceptions. 
Blanket purchase orders may be issued to cover recurring expenses for similar items when it is deemed necessary in order to allow departments to continue to provide or maintain current levels of service. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-124. - Special considerations. 
(a)  All correspondence or personal contact with sales people and vendors is to be directed to the purchasing department after any bid process is underway. 
(b)  Contracts for services or longterm purchase agreements should be sought for items that are routinely needed. 
(c)  No item or service shall be purchased without a purchase order. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-125. - Disclaimer for purchases made improperly. 
(a)  Gordon County will not be responsible for a purchase made by any county employee, county official, or an employee of any department utilizing public funds who fails to follow the appropriate procedure for a particular purchase. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may disclaim responsibility and liability for any expenditure or agreement for expenditure arising from a procurement of goods or services made in its name, in the name of any governmental department under its fiscal authority, by an unauthorized person or any person acting outside this article. The expense of any such disclaimed transaction will become the personal liability of the individual who acted improperly. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-126. - Vendors. 
(a)  Once the bid process is under way no further contact or correspondence regarding the purchase is allowed between the user department and the potential vendor until the bid is awarded. 
(b)  Price information provided by vendors is confidential. In no instance will quotations received from one (1) vendor during bids or other negotiations be divulged to other vendors prior to bid opening. 
(c)  Potential vendors should be instructed to contact the purchasing department. 
(d)  Offers of gifts from vendors should be reported to the purchasing department immediately. 
(e)  No informal agreements are to be made with vendors. 
(f)  Only the purchasing department will make formal agreements with vendors. 
(g)  No contact by elected officials or employees with vendors is allowed during the bid process. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-127. - Gifts and gratuities. 
(a)  Officials or county employees are not to accept gifts or gratuities from any individual, company, firm, or business establishment that is a vendor to the county or is marketing the county with regard to future purchases. All county contracts for purchase of services and goods will include a "covenant against gratuities" clause. Limitations should not be interpreted so as to prohibit acceptance of social courtesies that contribute to good public relations nor to prohibit employees from obtaining loans from established lending institutions. 
(b)  Kickbacks are illegal and shall not be accepted by any county employee or official for services or goods that have or will be provided. 
(c)  This provision does not prohibit the acceptance of a modest business meal or nominal entertainment when offered in the course of normal business activities. Any reciprocal arrangement between the county and vendors are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-128. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  No employee or official of Gordon County shall participate in the purchase of goods or services that would result in the individual or any member of the employee's immediate family realizing a financial gain. 
(b)  Officials or employees of the county shall not accept part-time employment with any vendor or contractor dealing with the county for purchases that are directly related to their county employment. 
(c)  Officials or employees of the county shall not be directly involved in a purchase from any vendor in which they or a member of their family is seeking employment. 
(d)  Officials or employees of the county shall remove themselves from the decision making process when there is an apparent or actual conflict of interest. 
(e)  Officials or employees of the county are prohibited from holding contracts for goods and services with any department of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-129. - Employees approved for purchasing. 
(a)  The purchasing department will maintain a list of county employees who are authorized by their department head to requisition goods and services. Employees not on the list who request purchase orders will not be allowed to proceed until authorization from their department head is obtained. 
(b)  Department heads must submit a list of persons in their departments authorized to process requisitions. 
(c)  Department heads must update the list as changes occur. 
(d)  Department heads shall inform their employees as to the individuals within their department who are authorized to process requisitions. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-130. - Financial limits. 
(a)  The following schedule shall be adhered to in the purchasing process: 

 
(b)  All purchase orders approved by the purchasing department will require a requisition from the requesting department. All requisitions submitted shall clearly describe and specify the goods and/or services desired in such a way as to permit unrestricted bidding and maximum opportunity to bidders. 
(c)  Requisitions shall not be divided into smaller quantities of the same product or submitted on multiple requisitions to circumvent the purchasing system. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-131. - Bidding guidelines. 
(a)  Bids will be opened publicly in the presence of a representative of the purchasing department. 
(b)  Every opportunity will be made to leave competitive bidding open to as large a number of bidders as is practically possible. 
(c)  All bids are required to be in writing and received before a specified time. 
(d)  Once opened a bid is considered final. 
(e)  The purchasing director, with the approval of the county administrator, may waive the competitive bidding process in emergencies. 
(f)  A five (5) percent or greater bid bond may be required on certain bids. Failure to include a bid bond, when required, shall result in automatic bid rejection. 
(g)  Public works projects are subject to current federal, state, and local laws. Bids may require submittal of a one hundred (100) percent performance/payment bond. Failure to submit required bonds shall result in automatic contract cancellation and appropriate penalties may be imposed. 
(h)  Public works contracts are required to be advertised for four (4) consecutive weeks in accordance with State of Georgia law. 
(i)  When telephone quotes are used, a written record will be maintained of the details indicating the requisition number, the date, and the name of the vendor contacted, the quote, and the terms. 
(j)  The county specifically reserves the right to accept or reject any or all bids and to waive any technicalities and formalities. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-132. - Capital and small equipment expenditures. 
(a)  Capital expenditures are defined as expenditures for items that cost five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more and have a useful life of greater than one (1) year. 
(b)  Small equipment expenditures are defined as expenditures for items that cost one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more and less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and have a useful life of greater than one (1) year. 
(c)  Capital expenditures and small equipment expenditures in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more must be approved by the board of commissioners through the adoption of the annual operating and capital budgets or later by a specific request for a budget amendment. 
(d)  All requests for capital must be submitted in detail identifying the cost of each item in the annual capital budget or later by a specific request for a budget amendment. 
(e)  All requests for small equipment must be submitted in detail identifying the cost of each item in the annual operating budget or later by a specific request for a budget amendment. The provision that increases the capitalization threshold to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) will be effective on July 16, 2002. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00; Ord. of 7-16-02) 
Sec. 2-133. - Emergency purchasing. 
(a)  An emergency purchase is one in which a situation exists where inventory, supplies, equipment, etc. are depleted and would hamper county operations or pose a threat to public safety. 
(b)  A written explanation shall be submitted to the purchasing director as soon as possible as to the reasons for the emergency and as to the choice of vendor. Failure to plan shall not be used as a valid reason for an emergency. 
(c)  One (1) of the following shall be contacted when an emergency item(s) needed: 
(1)  County administrator. 
(2)  Finance director. 
(3)  Purchasing director. 
(d)  The user department will contact the vendor to acquire the needed item or items. 
(e)  The vendor must supply the item or items and the correct documentation (invoice). 
(f)  The user department must prepare a purchase requisition containing detailed information on the item or items purchased. The request form shall be clearly labeled "EMERGENCY" and shall be signed by the department head if appropriate. 
(g)  The requisition form must then be forwarded to the purchasing department with the invoice and any other appropriate information. 
(h)  The purchasing director will then contact the vendor and issue a purchase order number or the using department may enter a requisition and receive a purchase order to deliver to the vendor. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-134. - Normal purchasing procedures. 
(a)  All departments must submit a requisition on the MUNIS financial accounting system to the purchasing department. The required price quotes must be submitted in the note section of the requisition. 
(b)  The purchasing director will check the department's availability of funds to purchase the requested item or items. 
(c)  The purchasing director will then, if funds are available, release a purchase order to the user department. 
(d)  The user department must then issue the assigned purchase order to the vendor. 
(e)  The user department will then arrange the delivery as to time and place desired. 
(f)  When delivered, the department must check the items against the invoice. 
(g)  The invoice shall then be delivered to accounts payable to be matched with the purchase order form, and processed. 
(h)  Where appropriate, warranty forms shall be maintained in a "warranty file" in the user department. A copy of this warranty shall be provided to the purchasing director. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-135. - Sole source purchasing 
Sole source shall be used when there is not a competitive alternative available. Under sole source conditions, a complete detailed explanation must be submitted to the purchasing department. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-136. - Bidding procedures. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized, all county purchases of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and greater will be purchased by sealed bids or sealed proposals. Exceptions may include emergency purchases and sole provider status. 
(b)  Sealed bids shall be used when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are clear specifications; 
(2)  Basis of award is price (as related to quality desired); 
(3)  There are several bidders who can provide the product or service; 
(4)  There is more than one (1) brand or product that meets the requirements or the specified brand can be obtained through more than one (1) source; 
(5)  There is adequate time to advertise and solicit bids. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-137. - Sealed bids. 
(a)  The user department must submit a requisition on the MUNIS financial accounting system. 
(b)  The purchasing director will check the department's availability of funds to purchase the requested item. 
(c)  An invitation to bid will be produced by the purchasing director. The invitation to bid will be advertised in the legal organ for a minimum period of two (2) weeks prior to the designated bid or proposal opening or in accordance with state law. 
(d)  If available, a minimum of three (3) vendors will be contacted in reference to submitting sealed bids. The following process will be used to ensure competitive bidding: 
(1)  Advertisement in surrounding area newspapers; 
(2)  Area yellow pages searched to locate possible vendors; 
(3)  Referencing of past bid/proposal files to locate vendors; 
(4)  Internet searches for appropriate vendors; 
(5)  Placement of bid/proposal announcement on the Gordon County website. 
(e)  Bid specifications will be written so as not to exclude nor favor any vendor whenever possible. 
(f)  When bids are received, they will be stamped as to date and time they arrived at the purchasing department. At the time and place specified in the bid invitation, the bids will be opened in the order received and read aloud for public record. 
(g)  Bids will then be evaluated based on the ability to meet the bid package specifications. 
(h)  The purchasing director will evaluate the bids on the basis of the lowest responsive bid and responsible bidder. A responsive bid is one that meets all specifications and requirements of the bid document. A responsible bidder is one who is capable to best deliver the product or service indicated in the bid package. The purchasing director will take all factors into account and make a recommendation for The Gordon County Board of Commissioners. 
(i)  The recommendation generated by the purchasing director will be forwarded to the county administrator and the board of commissioners for discussion. In arriving at the recommendation, purchasing director and the user department will evaluate the technical aspects of the product to determine if it meets the specifications. The successful bidder will be contacted and a purchase order will be released. 
(j)  Bidders under the sealed bid process are not allowed to alter bid packages in any way after they have been opened at the bid opening time. Late bids will not be accepted. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-138. - Sealed proposals. 
(a)  Sealed proposals will be handled and processed in the same manner as sealed bids. The sealed proposal method is an alternative to the bid procurement process. It may be used when clear specifications are not available or when a service is required. 
(b)  Price may or may not be used in the evaluation of the proposals. The basis of award is the criteria outlined in the proposal. At the public opening, only the names of the companies offering the proposals will be read. Because negotiations are still possible, the contents are not public documents until the purchase has been awarded. It is the purchasing department's responsibility to determine the method of purchase and to select the bid or proposal process. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-139. - Special issues; bids/proposals. 
(a)  Vendors performing a service as a result of the bid award shall provide proof of workers compensation and liability insurance. Vendors will also be required to have workers compensation and liability insurance for projects that fall outside of the bid/proposal when conditions require. Vendors may be required to submit a minimum of a five (5) percent bid bond and/or a one hundred (100) percent payment/performance bond. These bonds can take the following forms: cash, certified check, letter of credit, or any insured appropriate form. 
(b)  All conditions being equal, the in-county vendor will be awarded the bid in the case of a tie. In the case of multiple in-county ties or multiple out-of-county ties, the decision will be determined by drawing. 
(c)  If alternates are offered in the bidding/proposal process, a full explanation of how the alternative will meet the required specifications shall be submitted with the bid/proposal. 
(d)  Gordon County shall reserve the right to accept/reject any or all of the alternative proposals. 
(e)  In certain situations that involve highly technical solutions a pre-bid conference may be required. If so required, only bids from those potential bidders in attendance will be considered. 
(f)  Gordon County shall reserve the right to cancel the bid/proposal process for any reason and Gordon County shall reserve the right to reject any or all bids/proposals from the process should the bids/proposals be found insufficient. 
(g)  Vendors will be required to sign a form that states that they agree to the terms and conditions contained in the bid/proposal package as well as applicable federal, state, and local laws. Each vendor shall sign a form indicating that no act(s) of collusion have taken place in the bid/proposal process. 
(h)  Gordon County shall reserve the right to purchase from any State of Georgia contract. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-140. - Disposal of equipment. 
The purchasing director shall be contacted when any department determines that there is equipment to be disposed of. Equipment is surplused for disposal when it has been determined that it has been found to have no useful life cycle remaining. All county property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-141. - Loaning of equipment. 
Equipment/vehicles shall not be used for personal reasons. Equipment may be loaned to contracted parties where in-kind work will benefit Gordon County and proof of insurance can be obtained. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Sec. 2-142. - Professional services. 
Professional services that are exempted by state law from bid requirements may be excluded from some of the provisions of this article as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-05-00) 
Secs. 2-143—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-150. - Purpose. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the county that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all county officials is adopted by ordinance. 
(b)  Purposes. This code has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by county officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the county; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters which may affect the county; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. I) 
Sec. 2-151. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the board of commissioners, the planning commission, all appointees of the board of commissioners, and all county department heads. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. II) 
Sec. 2-152. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
County official or officials, unless otherwise expressly defined, means members of the board of commissioners, all direct appointees of the board of commissioners, all department heads reporting to the county administrator, members of the planning commission, appeals board and authorities, whether such persons are salaried, hired or elected, and any other person holding positions designated by the county, as may be amended from time to time. County official, unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the board of commissioners to all county authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other county bodies, unless specifically exempted from this ordinance by the board of commissioners. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the board of commissioners or other appointed bodies, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the board or other appointed bodies, which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of any county official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a county official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest in another person or an entity if: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of ten (10) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity; or 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous twelve (12) months or the previous calendar year, equaled or exceeded five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or twenty-five (25) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; [or] 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity, other than a corporate entity owned or created by the board of commissioners; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, provided, however, a commercially reasonable loan made to a county official in a lender's ordinary course of business at prevailing rates and terms, and which does not discriminate against or in favor of a county official (because of that official's status as a public servant) shall not be included as a part of this definition. 
(5)  Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. III) 
Sec. 2-153. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or other, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority, in any matter before the board of commissioners, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the board of commissioners or any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office, which has a value of over one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(e)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall enter into any contract with the county, except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the county shall make known that interest in writing to the board of commissioners and the county clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)  No county official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a county official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair judgment or performance of county duties. 
(i)  If a county official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the body on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No county official shall use county facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No county official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall use such position to coerce, intimidate, threaten, harass, or make promises of promotion or pay to any county employee beyond that which is permissible under the county personnel ordinance. 
(m)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall use such position for any personnel purpose beyond that which the board of commissioners specifically sanctions. 
(n)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall intentionally make false statements concerning other members of the board of commissioners; any members of any board, commission, or authority; any other appointees of the board of commissioners; and/or any employee(s) of Gordon County, Georgia. This prohibition shall include the repetition of statements and allegations which the speaker knowingly and intentionally makes for the purpose of maligning the reputation and character of others without having a factual basis for the statement and without being able to produce a factual basis for said statement. 
(o)  No member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board, commission, or authority shall disclose the proceedings, content, or discussions of an executive session or closed meeting of said body when such meeting is held in accordance with O.C.G.A. 50-14-1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. IV; Ord. of 11-6-01, § 1; Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1) 
Sec. 2-154. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
A county official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a county official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a non-profit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the county of the entity. Where the interest of a county official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the county official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. V) 
Sec. 2-155. - Exemptions. 
This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. of 1-16-01, Art. VI) 
Sec. 2-156. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(Ord. of 1-16-2001, Art. VII) 
Sec. 2-157. - Penalty. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the board of commissioners, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member. 
(2)  A fine greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be imposed by the board of commissioners, board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)  Request for resignation by the board of commissioners, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
Each board, commission, or authority shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Ord. of 1-16-00, Art. VIII) 
Secs. 2-158—2-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SAFETY AND LOSS PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-180. - General policy statement. 
It shall be the policy of Gordon County to: 
(1)  Provide the highest degree of safety and health possible for employees at all times and afford the same for the general public. 
(2)  Preserve and protect Gordon County and afford the same consideration towards the property of the general public. 
(3)  Hold department heads and supervisors responsible for implementing all phases of the Gordon County safety and loss prevention program. 
(4)  Identify all hazardous working conditions and take prompt corrective action to eliminate such conditions (within budgetary limitations). 
(5)  Provide safety training and education program so as to train and educate all Gordon County employees to the extent that they can perform their duties efficiently and safely. 
(6)  Comply with all safety and health rules and regulations. 
(7)  Scheduling and conducting regular safety meetings. 
(8)  Establish and periodically review safety and health rules and regulations making changes when necessary. 
(9)  Conduct periodic and followup safety inspections of all work locations. 
(10)  Institute disciplinary measures for violation of safety and health rules and regulations. 
(11)  Maintain the overall accident and injury rate at the lowest possible degree. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 1) 
Sec. 2-181. - Responsibilities—Departmental head/director. 
(1)  Maintaining safe and healthful working conditions within their jurisdiction whether out in the field, in [the] shop or in the office. 
(2)  Controlling injuries, accidents, liabilities, and waste of materials within their jurisdiction. 
(3)  Providing the leadership and positive direction essential in maintaining effective accident prevention by setting proper examples. 
(4)  Ensuring that all personnel under their direction comply with all safety and health rules and regulations. 
(5)  Halting any operation that becomes hazardous to employees or citizens. 
(6)  Ensuring that regular departmental safety meetings are held and attended by all levels of personnel under their direction to review departmental accidents and to take corrective action in the prevention of accidents. 
(7)  Fully cooperating and insuring that their departments are in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(8)  Fully cooperating with safety and health inspections. 
(9)  Report[ing] all accidents and injuries to human resources as soon as possible. 
(10)  Implementing appropriate disciplinary measures of accidents resulting from common negligence and/or common violation of prescribed safety and health rules and regulations. 
(11)  Ensuring all new hires are given a departmental orientation including safety and departmental rules. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 2) 
Sec. 2-182. - Same—Supervisor. 
(1)  Ensuring safe actions of the employees under their supervision and ensuring safe performance of the machines and equipment within their jurisdiction. 
(2)  Ensuring that all employees under their supervision are fully trained for the jobs they are assigned to do, that they are familiar with the work rules, and that they understand compliance is mandatory. 
(3)  Ensuring that all prescribed safety rules and regulations are implemented and followed to the maximum. 
(4)  Taking the initiative to recommend correction of deficiencies noted in facilities, work procedures, employee job knowledge, or attitudes that adversely affect Gordon County's accident prevention efforts. 
(5)  Ensuring that employees are dressed safely and sensibly before starting to work. 
(6)  Fully cooperating in shutting down operations considered to be imminent danger to employees or the general public, or in removing personnel from hazardous jobs when they are not wearing or using prescribed equipment. 
(7)  Ensuring that all accidents or injuries involving employees under their supervision are properly reported regardless of how trivial they may seem. All accident or injury reports must be submitted to the department head and human resources before the close of the workday in which the accident or injury occurred. Except for employees that work weekend/holiday shifts, submit report the next business day. 
(8)  Investigating the cause of all accidents involving employees under their supervision which result in personal injury or damage to county or private property and reporting findings to department head and human resources. 
(9)  Demonstrating a personal concern for safety by directly interviewing and counseling with each employee who has: 
(a)  Lost time from work because of an on-the-job accident regardless of whether it is "chargeable" or "nonchargeable". 
(b)  Been involved in a vehicular accident regardless of whether it is "chargeable" or "nonchargeable". 
(10)  Being prompt in giving recognition to those employees who perform their work in a safe and efficient manner. 
(11)  Being firm in the enforcement of prescribed safety rules and regulations by immediately reporting those employees who fail to adhere to prescribed safety rules and regulations to the department head for corrective action. 
(12)  Providing assistance as needed by department heads to administer appropriate disciplinary measures for "chargeable" accidents or injuries. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-183. - Same—Employees. 
(1)  Exercising due care in the course of their work to prevent injuries to themselves, their fellow workers, to the general public and to prevent damage to county and private property. 
(2)  Maintaining an alert and businesslike attitude at all times. 
(3)  Reporting all accidents, regardless of how trivial, to the immediate supervisor as soon as the accident or injury occurs. 
(4)  Avoiding the engagement in any horseplay or practical jokes. 
(5)  Keeping work areas clean and orderly. 
(6)  Reporting all unsafe conditions immediately to the supervisor. 
(7)  Obeying all safety rules and regulations. If any doubt exists about the safety of doing a job, the employee shall stop and get instructions or assistance from the supervisor before continuing work. 
(8)  Wearing prescribed protective equipment. 
(9)  Operating only machinery or equipment which they are trained and authorized to operate. 
(10)  Using proper tools and equipment for the job to be performed. 
(11)  Learning to lift and handle material properly. 
(12)  Being dressed safely and sensibly before starting to work. 
(13)  Taking an active part in the safety program. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 4) 
Secs. 2-184—2-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC SAFETY POLICIES 

Sec. 2-200. - Adherence to traffic laws. 
All employees, while in the operation of a county vehicle, must obey all traffic laws and the traffic control devices present. (Except to any county emergency vehicles in responding to an emergency call by using due regard to all traffic laws or traffic signals and activate emergency warning lights and siren on responding county vehicles). 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 5A) 
Sec. 2-201. - Personal protective equipment (PPE). 
Employees whose positions or duties require that they wear any type of personal protective equipment (PPE), including eye goggles, ear protection, gloves, safety vests, and others, must wear such equipment while in the performance of their duties. Failure to do so may result in disciplinary action against the employee or, where the employee's supervisor does not enforce this policy, the employee's supervisor. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 6A) 
Sec. 2-202. - Drug test following accident. 
Any employee while on county job duties involved in an accident must report accident to their supervisor or department head and immediately be taken for a drug and alcohol screen. 
If the employee's supervisor determines that the circumstances surrounding the accident give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the employee may be in violation of the county drug and alcohol policy, the supervisor or department head may prohibit the employee from operating a county vehicle until such time as the results of the employee's drug and alcohol test are returned. Once the human resources department has results of the test, the employee's supervisor or department head will be notified of said results. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 7A) 
Sec. 2-203. - Hepatitis vaccinations. 
Employees who, due to the nature of their position, may come into contact with the hepatitis B virus, shall be offered the hepatitis B vaccine on a voluntary basis. Each such employee shall be identified upon being hired and offered the vaccination. If the employee refuses the vaccination, the employee shall be required to sign a "vaccination refusal" form. 
Employees who currently work in at-risk positions must be offered the vaccination as soon as possible and, where the vaccination is refused, execute the same vaccination refusal form. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 8A) 
Sec. 2-204. - Seatbelt usage. 
(a)  Each and every occupant of a county vehicle shall, while such vehicle is being operated on a public road, street, or highway, be restrained by a seat safety belt. 
(b)  This requirement shall not apply to: 
(1)  A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle or delivering property from the vehicle, if the speed of the vehicle between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour; provided however, that said vehicle is not traveling farther than one-half (½) mile. 
(2)  A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear a seat safety belt. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 9A) 
Sec. 2-205. - Operating in "unsafe" conditions or location. 
When, in the course of operations, an employee finds that, because of the presence of an unsafe condition, he or she cannot perform their assigned duties in a safe manner, the employee must stop immediately and notify his or her supervisor of the unsafe condition which interferes with the duty. 
Supervisors must, in turn, investigate the unsafe condition and determine, if possible, whether the condition can be easily corrected such that the employee may perform their duties. If, after careful investigation, the supervisor determines that the unsafe condition cannot easily be corrected, the supervisor must notify his or her department head of the condition. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 10A) 
Secs. 2-206—2-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCIPLINARY SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-235. - Procedures—Personal injury. 
In order to establish and maintain an essential respect for safety, it may become necessary to institute disciplinary measures ranging from written warnings to dismissals. Each safety rule shall be strictly enforced and ignorance therefore will not be accepted as an excuse for neglect or omission of duty. Supervisors and department heads are responsible for ensuring that safety rules and regulations are enforced and in the determination and ruling of personal injury violations based on facts outlined in accident reports or other data pertaining to the accident or its cause. 
The following disciplinary measures apply to accidents resulting from common negligence and/or common violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations. 
Minimum penalties are to be assessed by the department head/director. 

 
If, during the investigation of accidents, supervisors are found to have been negligent in their duties to train, discipline or counsel employees in the safe and healthy performance of their duties, they will be given a written reprimand or suspension without pay for their failure to perform the duties of a supervisor. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 11A) 
Sec. 2-236. - Same—Vehicular accident 
The following disciplinary measures apply to accidents resulting from common negligence and/or common violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations. 
Minimum penalties are to be assessed by the department head/director. 

 
If, during the investigation of accidents, supervisors are found to have been negligent in their duties to train, discipline, or counsel employees in the safe and health[ful] performance of their duties, they will be given written reprimands or suspensions without pay for their failure to perform their duties as a supervisor. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 12B) 
Sec. 2-237. - Same—General liability. 
In order to establish and maintain an essential respect for safety, it may become necessary to institute disciplinary measures ranging from verbal—written warning to dismissals. Each safety rule shall be strictly enforced and ignorance thereof will not be accepted as an excuse for neglect or omission of duty. Department heads/directors, with the assistance of supervisors, are responsible for ensuring that safety rules and regulations are enforced and in the determination [of whether] accidents [are] "chargeable" or "nonchargeable" based on facts outlined in the accident report or other data pertaining to the accident or its cause. 
The following disciplinary measures apply to accidents resulting from common negligence and/or common violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations. 
Minimum penalties are to be assessed by the department head/director. 

 
If, during the investigation of accidents, supervisors are found to have been negligent in their duties to train, discipline or counsel employee in the safe and healthy performance of their duties, they will be given a written reprimand or suspension without pay for their failure to perform the duties of a supervisor. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 13C) 
Sec. 2-238. - Other causes for discipline. 
(1)  Operating a county vehicle with out a valid Georgia driver's license. 
(2)  Improper reporting of an accident or injury. 
(3)  Failure to call proper authorities for an investigation of the accident. 
(4)  Failure to report an accident or injury immediately after its occurrence. 
(5)  Failure to wear prescribed personal protective equipment. 
(6)  Failure to follow prescribed safety practices. 

 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 14D) 
Sec. 2-239. - Other disciplinary measures/procedures. 
[Authority and responsibility.] Department heads/director shall have the authority and responsibility for assessing disciplinary measures (over and above) the disciplinary measure for "chargeable" accidents resulting from gross negligence and/or extreme willful violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations, departmental codes, general orders, other personal rules and regulations, etc. 
Procedure. To ensure interdepartmental consistency, this procedure shall be used in assessing additional disciplinary measures. 
(1)  The department head/director shall confer with human resources to compare the accident or violation with similar accidents or violations of the past before assessing additional disciplinary measures. 
(2)  The department head/director with concurrence of the human resources [department], shall assess disciplinary measures comparable to those assessed in similar cases of the past. 
(3)  Where no similar accident or violation has occurred in the past, the department head/director and human resources shall agree on fair, but stern, disciplinary measures to be assessed. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 15E) 
Secs. 2-240—2-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-260. - Procedures for reporting injuries—Employee. 
Timely reporting of any personal injury accidents is mandatory. The workers' compensation accident report is necessary for processing any workers' compensation and medical claims. 
The employee must: 
(1)  Report immediately to his/her supervisor and contact human resources. 
(2)  Report to the appropriate medical treatment facility (if necessary) and ensure that all followup medical treatments [appointments] are kept. 
(3)  Complete a (workers' compensation accident report) and turn it into your supervisor for his/her signature. Then forward the completed report to human resources as soon as possible. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 16) 
Sec. 2-261. - Same—Supervisor. 
The supervisor must: 
(1)  Seek medical treatment, if needed, for the employee. 
(2)  Verify completed (workers' compensation accident report) and submit the report to human resources as soon as possible, no later than the end of a working day in which the injury/accident occurred. Except for employees that work weekend/holiday shifts submit report the next business day. 
(3)  Investigate the circumstances which caused the injury/accident and recommend the appropriate corrective measures to eliminate any hazard and prevent future occurrences. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 17) 
Sec. 2-262. - Same—Department head/director. 
The department head/director will: 
(1)  Review all (workers' compensation accident reports) for accuracy and completion. 
(2)  Have a copy of the (workers' compensation accident reports) delivered to the human resources [department] at the end of the work day but no later than within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it was received. Except for employees that work weekend/holiday shifts submit report next business day. 
(3)  Forward a copy of your review of determination if the accident was a "chargeable" or "nonchargeable" accident. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 18) 
Sec. 2-263. - Vehicular accidents—Employee/operator. 
The operator of any county vehicle involved in an accident or discovering damage to same, regardless of who is at fault or how trivial the damage might appear, must: 
(1)  Call the nearest law enforcement agency to request an investigation of the accident. If an accident occurs in the city limits of Calhoun contact Calhoun Police Department. If an accident occurs in Gordon County with injuries, damage to private property, major damage to vehicle, or more than one (1) vehicle involved in the accident contact the Georgia State Patrol. If an accident occurs with no damage to private property, no injuries, minor damage to vehicle and a single-vehicle accident contact the Gordon County Sheriff's Office. 
(2)  Contact your immediate supervisor and human resources after the accident as soon as possible with all necessary information. (Injuries, time, location, etc.) 
(3)  If is alleged by another party that a county-owned vehicle caused damage to his/her vehicle or property, the employee is to contact their immediate supervisor and human resources as soon as possible whether are not any damage was caused. 
(4)  Damage caused by flying or falling debris such as rocks, asphalt, limbs, etc., regardless of how minor the damage might be, must be reported. 
(5)  In case of an accident between two (2) or more county-owned vehicles, follow steps #1 and #2; also a report [must be] submitted by the operators of the vehicles involved. 
(6)  In cases involving damage to county vehicles that have no operators, and are not assigned to any particular employee, the department head to whom the vehicle is assigned (permanently or temporarily) is responsible for seeing that the investigation report is filed. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 19) 
Sec. 2-264. - Same—Supervisor. 
The supervisor must: 
(1)  Make personal contact with the employee if injured in vehicle accident. 
(2)  Follow up to make sure that reporting procedures have been completed. 
(3)  Report the accident to the department head and human resources as soon as possible with as much information as possible. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 20) 
Sec. 2-265. - Same—Department head/director. 
The department head/director must: 
(1)  Review all the vehicle accident reports for accuracy and completion. 
(2)  Forward a copy of the vehicle accident report to human resources as soon as possible and also obtain two (2) or three (3) estimates of [repair costs for] the damaged vehicle. 
(3)  Review the information/reports to make a determination if the vehicle accident was "chargeable" or "non-chargeable accident. 
a.  If the accident is "chargeable" due to common negligence and/or violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations, the department head/director should take appropriate disciplinary action. 
b.  If the accident is "chargeable" due to gross negligence and/or extreme willful violation of the prescribed safety rules and regulations, departmental code, general orders, other personnel rules and regulations, etc. then the department head/director should appropriate disciplinary measures over and above the minimum penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 21) 
Sec. 2-266. - General liability accidents—Employee. 
The employee must: 
(1)  A report of any accident is mandatory and [the employee] must immediately contact his/her supervisor and human resources, [advising them] of the liability accident as soon as possible. 
(2)  Report any damage to the owner of the damaged property. If the owner of the damaged property is unavailable, the employee shall leave the owner a "damage notification report." 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 22) 
Sec. 2-267. - Same—Supervisor. 
The supervisor must: 
(1)  Report the accident to the department head and human resources. Also submit and review the accident report for accuracy. 
(2)  Investigate the circumstances which caused the accident and recommend the appropriate corrective measures to eliminate the hazard and prevent future occurrences. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 23) 
Sec. 2-268. - Same—Department head/director. 
The department head/director will: 
(1)  Review all accident reports for accuracy and completion. 
(2)  Have a copy of the accident report delivered to the human resources as soon as possible, no later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time it is received, so the report can be sent to our insurance provider. 
(3)  Review the accident for determination of "chargeable" or "nonchargeable" accident. 
a.  If the accident is "chargeable" due to common negligence and/or common violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations, the department head should take appropriate disciplinary action. 
b.  If the accident is "chargeable" due to gross negligence and/or extreme willful violation of prescribed safety rules and regulations, departmental code, general orders, other personnel rules and regulations, etc. the department head should take appropriate disciplinary measures over and above the minimum penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 24) 
Sec. 2-269. - Gordon County inmates/work-detail. 
Any department of Gordon County [or any] Gordon County employee that uses Gordon County inmates to perform any details must follow accident report procedures. 
(a)  If an accident/injury occurs where a Gordon County inmate is involved and has sustained major injuries contact 911. The Gordon County inmate is to be transported to the hospital and contact the Gordon County Sheriff's Office so that an officer can respond to the hospital to take custody of the inmate and make the decision in regard to security of inmate. Also an accident/incident report must be completed and forward a copy of the report to the Gordon County Sheriff's Office and human resources as soon as possible. 
(b)  If an accident/injury occurs where a Gordon County inmate is involved and has sustained minor injuries apply first aid if possible or take inmate back to Gordon County Jail to be treated. Also an accident/incident report must be completed and sent to the Gordon County Sheriff's Office. 
(c)  If an accident occurs with no injuries contact the Gordon County Sheriff's Office and complete an accident/incident report as soon as possible. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 25) 
Secs. 2-270—2-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SAFETY INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 2-285. - Safety procedures. 
Safety inspections may vary in type and frequency. They may be conducted on an area basis, on an entire shop basis, or on specific operation basis. No advance notice is required before an inspection may be held. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 26) 
Sec. 2-286. - Safety violation advisory. 
Safety violation advisories may be issued to the department heads, supervisors, or employees for unsafe acts or for allowing unsafe conditions to exist. Recipients may be subject to disciplinary action which shall be determined by the department head in the case of an employee or supervisor, or by the office of the county administration in the case of a department head. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 27) 
Sec. 2-287. - Authority to inspect 
The Department head and supervisory personnel are expected to cooperate with the county's safety designee to enter, inspect, and investigate at any time, any work site, or establishment to ensure that all safety rules and regulations are in compliance. 
(Ord. of 6-18-02, § 28) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; malt beverage and wine licenses, § 7-101 et seq. signs, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Local alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq.; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking or intoxication generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 37-8-11, 37-8-53. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1—3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN CONTAINERS 

Sec. 3-26. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "open container" means any alcoholic beverage container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 1) 
Sec. 3-27. - Possession while operating or riding in motor vehicle. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess an open container while operating a motor vehicle on the public roads of the unincorporated county or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated on the public roads of the unincorporated county. 
(b)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger or is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
(c)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, §§ 2—4) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 3-28. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to the law of this state or any other state; 
(2)  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to the law of this state or any other state; or 
(3)  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of twenty-one (21) feet in length. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 5) 
Sec. 3-29. - Penalty. 
Any person, operator of a vehicle or passenger who violates this article shall be punished as is provided for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6) 
Chapter 3.5 - ANIMAL AND FOWL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3.5-1—3.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 3.5-21. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Gordon County Animal Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-20-99, § I) 
Sec. 3.5-22. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the control of stray dogs, cats, livestock, and other designated animals and to require that dogs, cats, livestock, and other such designated animals not be allowed to run at large. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability on Gordon County, its employees, agents, or officials which enforce or fail to enforce any of the provisions provided herein or any applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. of 4-20-99, § II) 
Sec. 3.5-23. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Cat: Any male or female cat of pure or mixed breed. 
Dog: Any male or female dog of pure or mixed breed. 
Livestock: All animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all ratites, including, but not limited to, ostriches, emus and rheas. 
Owner: Any natural person or legal entity including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody of an animal. 
Premises: A parcel of land and the structures thereon and equivalent to the term property. 
Stray cat: Any cat which is found off its owner's property without a collar and proof of rabies vaccination or any cat which is not claimed by anyone as its owner. 
Stray dog: Any dog which is found off its owner's property without a collar and proof of rabies vaccination or any dog which is not claimed by anyone as its owner. 
(Ord. of 4-20-99, § III) 
Sec. 3.5-24. - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  Dogs and cats. 
(1)  The following dogs and cats shall be subject to impoundment by Gordon County, its agents and employees: 
a.  All dogs and cats upon which a valid tag indicating inoculation against rabies is not appropriately attached. 
b.  All dogs and cats off the premises of the owner of the dog [or cat] which Gordon County's agent or employee has reason to believe is a stray dog [or cat]. 
c.  All dogs and cats running at large. The term "at large" means off the premises of the owner or keeper, and not under leash or other physical restraint of the owner or a responsible person. 
d.  Any female dog or cat in heat and off the premises of the owner or keeper. 
(2)  Notice of impoundment shall be given immediately by certified mail or hand delivery to the owner of the impounded dog or cat if such owner may be ascertained. Said notice by certified mail is effective if mailed to the last known address of the owner. Said notice by hand delivery is effective if made by personal delivery by an agent or employee of Gordon County to the premises of the owner and left with a responsible person or affixed to the door. 
(3)  Any dog or cat which has been impounded under the provisions of this article shall be disposed of in the following manners if the owner does not respond within three (3) days of impoundment or notice of impoundment, whichever last occurs, and does not comply with subsection (4) below: 
a.  The dog or cat may be placed in an adoptive home; 
b.  The dog or cat may be sold or released to a licensed Georgia rescue group; or 
c.  The dog or cat may be destroyed by such humane method as Gordon County may deem appropriate. 
(4)  During the aforesaid three-day period of impoundment, the owner of the impounded dog may claim such dog or cat and such dog or cat may be redeemed by its owner upon payment by the owner of the confiscation costs which shall be established from time to time by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. Prior to the return of the dog or cat to its owner(s), the owner shall either furnish proof to Gordon County that the dog or cat has been inoculated for rabies within the preceding twelve-month period or the owner shall pay for said inoculation prior to its release. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat or a person having a dog or cat in his possession or control to permit such dog or cat to be out of control and unattended on the premises of the owner within the unincorporated areas of Gordon County or upon the property of another person, without the permission of the owner of such property or the person in possession thereof. An animal is under control if it is controlled by a leash, is at heel or is beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or is within a vehicle being driven or parked on the road or a parking lot, or is within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
(6)  Fees and costs. The fees and costs with respect to the enforcement of this section of the article concerning dogs and cats shall be set by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the Gordon County Animal Shelter and may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Livestock. 
(1)  The state law known as "Livestock Running At Large or Straying", chapter 3 of O.C.G.A. title 4, and as amended, is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article. 
(2)  No owner shall permit livestock to run at large on, or to stray upon, the public roads of this state, the public roads of Gordon County, or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock, except by permission of the owner of such property. 
(3)  Notice of impoundment of any livestock shall be given in writing to the owner of said livestock, advising the owner of the location or place where the livestock is being held, the amount due as a result of the impounding, and that unless such livestock is redeemed within three (3) days from that date the livestock shall be offered for sale. In the event the owner of the livestock is unknown or cannot be found, service upon the owner shall be obtained by publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation where the livestock is impounded, Sundays and holidays excluded. Such notice shall be in substantially the form prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 4-3-5(a). 
Unless the impounded livestock is redeemed within three (3) days from the date of the notice, Gordon County shall forthwith give notice of sale thereof, which shall be held not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days, excluding Sundays and holidays, from the first publication of the notice of sale. The notice of sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and by posting a copy of such notice at the courthouse door. Such notice shall be in substantially the form prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 4-3-5(b). 
(4)  The owner of any impounded livestock shall have the right at any time before the sale thereof to redeem the livestock by paying all impounding expenses, including fees, keeping charges, and advertising or other costs incurred. In the event there is a dispute as to the amount of such costs and expenses, the owner may provide a bond with sufficient sureties, but not to exceed the fair cash value of such livestock. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the owner shall institute an action in the Magistrate Court of Gordon County to have the dispute adjudicated by the court or referred to a jury if requested by either party to the action. If said suit is not instituted by the owner, then the bond shall be forfeited to Gordon County. 
(5)  Fees and costs. The fees and costs with respect to the enforcement of this section of the article concerning livestock shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A § 4-3-10. In addition, should any fees and costs be incurred by Gordon County for the impoundment of livestock which are not itemized in the above-referenced code section, then the board of commissioners shall establish an amount for said fee or cost to be paid by the owner as reimbursement for services rendered by Gordon County as a result of the impoundment of said livestock. 
(Ord. of 4-20-99, § IV; Ord. of 1-2-13, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 3.5-25. - Jurisdiction. 
Jurisdiction for action brought pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be in the Magistrate Court of Gordon County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-20-99, § V) 
Sec. 3.5-26. - Tethering dogs. 
(a)  The length of a tether used on any dog shall not be less than ten (10) feet in length and shall allow access to the maximum available exercise area; 
(b)  The tether shall allow free access to food, water, and shelter; and 
(c)  The tether shall not allow the animal to leave the owner's lot or parcel. 
(Ord. of 1-2-13, § 1) 
Secs. 3.5-27—3.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3.5-41. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the board of health to prevent and control rabies as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. Rabies is a viral infection that enters the central nervous system of the host, causing an encephalomyelitis that is almost always fatal. Therefore, this article is adopted to serve the public health, safety and welfare in battling this dangerous disease and the extreme measures set forth herein and in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition, which is incorporated herein, are necessitated by the threat posed by rabies exposure. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 1) 
Sec. 3.5-42. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Board of health" shall mean the Gordon County Board of Health. The Gordon County Health Department is the administrative arm of the Gordon County Board of Health. 
"Rabies control officer" shall mean that officer designated by the board of health to enforce this article, and that person's designees. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 2) 
Sec. 3.5-43. - Rabies control officer. 
The board of health, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7, hereby designates the department head of the Gordon County Animal Control Department as the county rabies control officer. The county rabies control officer shall be empowered to administer and enforce this article and to utilize the staff and officers of the Gordon County Animal Control Department as his or her deputies in carrying out such duties. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 3) 
Sec. 3.5-44. - Notification of bites. 
It shall be the duty of any person bitten by a wild or domestic animal to immediately notify the Gordon County Health Department. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or any person having possession and knowledge of any animal which has bitten any person or animal or of any animal which exhibits any signs of rabies to notify the Gordon County Health Department and to confine such animal in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 4) 
Sec. 3.5-45. - Rabies vaccination and rabies tags. 
All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies. Dogs and cats shall wear current, valid rabies tags attached to their collars at all times, except when removal is necessary for cleaning, grooming or other veterinary care. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of a dog or cat to allow the animal to be outdoors without wearing a collar with a current rabies tag showing that the animal has been inoculated for rabies within one (1) year of any such time as the rabies tag may be checked. Owners of cats must be able to show proof of current vaccination if no collar and tag is displayed. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 5) 
Sec. 3.5-46. - Enforcement and impoundment. 
The rabies control officer shall be authorized to impound and quarantine any animal that has been bitten by wild animals or bitten by dogs or cats that do not have current records of vaccination against rabies. Management of animals exposed to rabies shall be according to the procedures set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition, which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth fully herein. The protocols for livestock, dogs, cats and ferrets possibly exposed to rabies, as well as the protocols for animal to animal exposure and human exposure shall be enforced as set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. The rabies control officer shall be authorized to take any and all steps set forth in said manual up to and including euthanizing and testing of animals. The rabies control officer shall also be authorized to impound dogs that are running at large without rabies tags. 
(1)  Notice. Notice shall be provided to the owner and shall include the description of the animal, the location where the animal was impounded, the reason for impoundment, the citation number if a citation was issued, the name and business address of the rabies control officer impounding the animal, the name and business location of the Gordon County Animal Shelter, the hours during which the animal can be reclaimed, and fees to be charged to the owner. The notice shall be delivered personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If an owner is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be made by posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the location where the animal was impounded. 
(2)  Animals without rabies tags. The owner of an animal impounded for lack of rabies tags may reclaim the animal upon payment of the violation fine, vaccination or tag fee and impoundment fee. Owners shall have no more than seven (7) days from the date of notice to cure or correct the violation, or the dogs shall be deemed unclaimed; this time limit may be extended by the rabies control officer, to no more than twenty (20) days. After seven (7) business days any animal unclaimed by its owner, after such owner has been notified of the impoundment of such animal, shall be placed for adoption, or humanely destroyed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. After seven (7) business days any animal whose owner cannot be ascertained, shall be placed for adoption, or humanely destroyed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. 
(3)  Animals impounded for rabies quarantine. Animals impounded for rabies quarantine shall be isolated pursuant to the procedures of the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. If the animal shows signs of rabies or dies during confinement, it will be sent off for testing. If the animal survives and does not show signs of rabies, it will be returned to the owner upon payment of fees. 
(4)  Impoundment fees. An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) impoundment fee plus a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day the animal is impounded as a boarding fee if impounded at the shelter (or the actual costs of impoundment if impounded off site), and the actual veterinary costs for care of the animal. Livestock impounding fees may vary and will be set by the rabies control officer if boarded at the shelter. Impoundment fees are subject to change. A current list of impoundment fees shall be posted at the Gordon County Animal Shelter. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 6) 
Sec. 3.5-47. - Quarantine/isolation procedures. 
In certain circumstances, the rabies control officer may allow the animal owner to quarantine the animal that has been bitten in lieu of the animal being euthanized and tested. The quarantine period varies depending on the circumstance, as set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. In that case, the animal must be placed in a secure enclosure where no other animal or person can be exposed to the virus which can be transmitted into bite wounds, open cuts in skin and onto mucous membranes. The animal must be kept in a secure enclosure approved by the rabies control officer and when deemed necessary may require two (2) layers of fencing, separated by at least one (1) foot. Food must be pushed in from a distance and the animal cannot be approached by any person. Other protocols for quarantine shall be provided by the rabies control officer. If the animal escapes from the enclosure, it will be impounded and euthanized for testing. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 7) 
Sec. 3.5-48. - Violations. 
Violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor. The minimum fine for a violation of this article shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). The rabies control officer shall be empowered to issue citations to the magistrate courts and municipal courts of this county. The officer shall likewise be empowered to bring actions for injunctive relief in superior court. 
(Ord. of 11-11-11, § 8) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; planning and development, Ch. 11; signs, Ch. 13; soil erosion and sedimentation, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 16; wastewater, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 18. 
State Constitution reference— Building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Art. IX, § II, Par. III. 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. Tit. 8; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-25, 36-13-1 et seq.; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. Tit. 25; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors and low-voltage contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1, 4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 5, 1995(1), adopting various technical codes and building regulations, superseded, in effect repealed, §§ 4-1 and 4-2, which pertained respectively to scope and license required and derived from an ordinance adopted May 18, 1982, and an ordinance adopted Mar. 7, 1989, art. X. 
Secs. 4-3—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODES GENERALLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 5, 1995(1), adopting various technical codes and building regulations, superseded, in effect repealed, the provisions of this article relative to codes generally and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, this article consisted of §§ 4-26, 4-36—4-38, and 4-51—4-53, and derived from ordinances adopted: May 18, 1982, art. 2, §§ I—III and art. 5, §§ I and II; June 21, 1983; and Apr. 7, 1992, §§ 1—3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-26. - Standard codes—Enforcement. 
The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the county: 
(1)  Standard Building Code. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code. 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code. 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Same—Appendices adopted. 
The following appendices of the codes adopted in section 4-26, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix C, D, and H. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix A. 
(3)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix B, C, D, and J. 
(4)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix C and D. 
(5)  National Electrical Code: Appendix A. 
(6)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code: Appendix A and F. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1)) 
Sec. 4-28. - Same—Adopted. 
The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(2)  Standard Housing Code. 
(3)  National Fire Protection Association Fire Codes (NFPA). 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1); Ord. of 3-1-05, § 1) 
Sec. 4-29. - Procedures for administration and enforcement. 
The procedures set out in divisions 2 through 4 of this article shall be the procedures that govern the administration and enforcment process for the codes adopted in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1)) 
Secs. 4-30—4-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-36. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed and heretofore adopted. Hereinafter, all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes." 
(b)  Codes remedial. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(1)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this division, except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(2)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
a.  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
b.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
c.  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this article. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
d.  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
e.  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
f.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
g.  Energy. The provisions of the Georgia State Energy Code shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
h.  CABO One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
i.  Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
j.  Standard Housing Code. The provisions of this code establish minimum standards and requirements for dwellings. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this article or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(c)  Building inspection department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building inspection department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building inspector. The building inspector and his department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained within this article. 
(1)  Records. The building inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(2)  Liability. Any employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting on the behalf of the county in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(d)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building inspector. 
(e)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § I) 
Sec. 4-37. - Powers and duties of the building inspector. 
(a)  General. The building inspector and his department are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building inspector and his department are further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building inspector by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credential and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building inspector, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. In no case may work be resumed without the prior approval of the building inspector. Where any emergency exists, the building inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation on application. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, in any case where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of provisions. The building inspector may revoke a permit upon determination by the building inspector that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide an adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve any such alternate, provided the building inspector finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § II) 
Sec. 4-38. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building inspection department and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Accessory buildings which are ten (10) feet by twelve (12) feet or less do not require a building permit. HOWEVER, any accessory building which requires a branch circuit panel board and/or a utility service shall be required to have a building permit. Accessory buildings which do not require a building permit are still required to meet all setback requirements as defined in the county zoning ordinance, codified herein as Chapter 18. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1.  Any portable heating appliance; 
2.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Any portable cooling unit; 
4.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this article; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following electrical work: 
1.  Any 120 volt branch circuit work involving two (2) circuits or less, provided that this work is done in an existing structure which did not require an additional permit. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building inspector without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building inspection department on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent, and shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
b.  The size of the building to be erected; 
c.  The location of the building on the lot; 
d.  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
e.  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
f.  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; 
g.  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed; and 
h.  Such other information as may be requested by the building inspector or required by any other county ordinance(s). 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the building inspector for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
Any building permit or other permit issued pursuant to this article shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building inspector, one (1) copy of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
EXCEPTION: No drawings or specifications shall be required for: 
a.  Accessory buildings, except engineered metal buildings shall require design data from the manufacturer which indicates meeting load requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
b.  Agricultural buildings, except engineered metal buildings shall require design data from the manufacturer which indicates meeting load requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(2)  Additional data. The building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building inspector to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A (Assembly), Group E (Educational), and Group I (Institutional) occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet (465m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building inspector may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building inspector may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous material stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building inspector may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building inspector may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building inspector copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and, upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building inspector relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building inspector shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(e)  Contractors' responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this article. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permission for extensions shall be in writing by the building inspector. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building inspector, are hazardous or complex, the building inspector shall require that computations [be submitted by the architect or engineer who] shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building inspector a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building inspector. 
(3)  Plans. When the building inspector issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, the set of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The set of drawings so reviewed shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work during normal business hours and shall be open to inspection by the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the necessary fees for such permit have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the size of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. All fees shall be as established from time to time by the board of commissioners and shall be posted in the building inspection department. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, etc., before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building inspection department shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing of the application, in accordance with the fees as established by the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building inspector. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building inspector may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building inspector, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(3)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(4)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building inspector or his representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building inspector. 
(5)  Required inspections. The building inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
BUILDING: 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
ELECTRICAL: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
PLUMBING: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall include a pressure test which shall be performed by the contractor. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See section 417 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
MECHANICAL: 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
GAS: 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test which shall be performed by the contractor. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this article and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building inspector. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three (3) inspections. 
(7)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building inspector. 
(8)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building inspector after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building inspector has been received. 
(i)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building inspector. 
a.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with all technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
b.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
c.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building inspector and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building inspector, two (2) sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete, is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building inspector and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building inspector may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building inspector shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building inspector shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new commercial building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building inspector may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy 
where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building inspection department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building inspector on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced and, if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § III) 
Sec. 4-39. - Tests. 
The building inspector may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § IV) 
Sec. 4-40. - Fire prevention. 
(a)  Maintenance. All buildings or structures both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. 
(b)  Fire safety inspector. The person who shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions contained in this article concerning fire prevention and the Standard Fire Prevention Code shall be known as the fire safety inspector. 
(1)  Records. The fire safety inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(2)  Liability. Any employee charged with the enforcement of this article concerning fire prevention, acting on the behalf of the county in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(c)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to maintain, store or handle materials or to conduct processes as described in this article shall first make application to the fire safety inspector and obtain the required permit. 
(2)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the fire safety inspector on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information as may be required by the fire safety inspector. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. 
(3)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing of the application, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the fire safety inspector for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The fire safety inspector shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the fire safety inspector is satisfied that the use described in an application for a permit and the drawings filed therewith conform to the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit describes a use which does not conform to the requirements of this article or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the fire safety inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the application to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
(e)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this article, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the fire safety inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this article. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the use authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the use authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the use is commenced. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. Such extensions shall be in writing by the fire safety inspector. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § V) 
Sec. 4-41. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the board of appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members. The board shall be appointed by the governing body of the county. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership. The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members. Such board shall consist of one (1) member from each commissioner district as defined by 1975 Georgia Laws, page 2719 et seq. or as amended. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred while representing the board. Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the board of commissioners upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(2)  Terms. Members appointed shall serve for terms of three (3) years. Members shall be allowed to succeed themselves at the discretion of the board of commissioners following the expiration of their term. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this article, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three (3) affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building inspector, not less than four (4) affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(4)  Secretary of board. The building inspector, or his designee, shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(5)  Powers. The board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (b)(6) below, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building inspector and to consider variances of the technical codes. 
(6)  Appeals. 
a.  Decision of the building inspector. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building inspector to the board of appeals whenever any one (1) of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
1.  The building inspector rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
2.  The provisions of this article do not apply to this specific case. 
3.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
4.  The true intent and meaning of this article or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
b.  Variances. The board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this code or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
2.  That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
3.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other buildings, structures or service systems. 
4.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
5.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
c.  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this code. Any variance which is granted by the board shall be for only that specific matter which is presented to the board, and shall not apply to other situations or circumstances which are not before the board. Any applications for a variance must be presented to the board on a case-by-case basis. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
d.  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building inspector. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building inspector. 
e.  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building inspector, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building inspector may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(c)  Procedures of the board. 
(1)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building inspector or varies the application of any provision of this code, the building inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building inspector and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building inspector for two (2) weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § VI; Ord. of 12-16-97(1), §§ 2, 3; Mo. of 12-16-97) 
Sec. 4-42. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article or of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the technical codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state and local laws. 
The jurisdiction for actions brought pursuant to this article shall be in the magistrate court of the county. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, altered, installed, demolished or moved in violation of this article or of the technical codes, the building inspector, or any other appropriate county authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies contained herein, may seek injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate relief to prevent the violation. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. A, § VIII) 
Secs. 4-43—4-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS TO TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 4-51. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide for the local amendments to the technical codes. These requirements shall be followed in addition to those included in the technical codes. 
(b)  Footings. The following are additional requirements for footings: 
(1)  Two (2) runs of one-half-inch (#4), minimum, steel rebar. 
a.  Rebar shall be evenly spaced horizontally and elevated off the floor of the footing a minimum of two-and-one-half (2½) inches and shall meet American Concrete Institute (ACI) Standard 318. 
b.  Rebar must run continuous through footing, including any step-downs and corners. 
c.  Where it is necessary to piece rebar, it shall overlap a minimum of twelve (12) inches. 
d.  All rebar shall be tied together using steel wire. 
e.  Rebar shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner. 
(2)  All grade stakes must be of metal material. 
(3)  All trenches for footings must be cleared of all roots, stumps, loose dirt, and other foreign matter. 
(4)  Bottom of footings shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches below grade. 
(c)  Foundations. The following are additional requirements for foundations: 
(1)  Foundations with a crawl space shall be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) inches above grade measured from the interior of the crawl space. 
(d)  Electrical. The following are additional requirements for residential electrical work: 
(1)  Smoke detectors. In addition to that required in the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) Code, a smoke detector shall be located in the same room as the electrical panel board unless the panel board is located in the garage. 
(2)  Service disconnect switch. A service disconnect switch shall be provided on the exterior of a dwelling adjacent to the utility company meter base, unless the meter base and panel board are in a "back-to-back" position on the same wall and where the service conductors do not leave the confines of these two (2) enclosures. 
(e)  Plumbing. The following are additional requirements for plumbing work: 
(1)  Polybutylene piping shall not be used. 
(f)  Conventional housing, modular houses. Conventional housing "moved on-site" and modular houses shall be subject to meeting the technical codes and any other applicable local ordinances. Modular homes shall be defined as a structure in which the major components are manufactured in a factory, transported to the site on trucks, where final assembly takes place. Modular homes are constructed on permanent foundations as a stick-built home would be. 
(g)  Minimum grade of lumber. The minimum grade of lumber which shall be allowed is number 2 grade. 
(h)  Backflow prevention. An anti-siphon device (backflow preventer) shall be installed on the water service pipe on the customer side of the water meter in a separate enclosure. The main service shutoff valve shall be located in this enclosure. 
(i)  Water heaters. All water heaters shall be provided with a thermal expansion valve. This valve shall be in addition to the temperature and pressure relief valve. 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. B, § I; Ord. of 10-11-16(1)) 
Secs. 4-52—4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 4-61. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the requirements for manufactured homes within the county. These requirements shall be followed in addition to those included in the technical codes. 
(b)  Definition. Manufactured home shall be defined as a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and the electrical systems contained thereon. 
(c)  Construction requirements. All manufactured homes placed in the county shall be constructed in conformity with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), provided however, the requirements of this section shall not apply to any manufactured home located in the county as of February 21, 1989, and on which there is located a current county tax sticker which was purchased prior to February 21, 1989, as reflected by the tax sticker purchase records of the tax digest on file in the office of the tax commissioner of the county. 
(1)  Should any manufactured home exempted by subsection (c) above be moved from the location of said home after April 12, 1992, to another location in the county, the owner shall apply for a moving permit from the building inspector. Before issuing a moving permit, the building inspector shall inspect said home to determine if the manufactured home meets the electrical wiring standards as set forth in the National Electrical Code. In addition, the manufactured home must also meet the standards set forth in the Standard Housing Code. Should the manufactured home fail to meet the wiring standards or the Standard Housing Code, no moving permit shall be issued nor shall a permit for permanent utilities be issued until the manufactured home is brought into compliance with the National Electrical Code and the Standard Housing Code. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a pre-HUD manufactured home to show proof that the manufactured home has been located in the county prior to February 21, 1989. Such proof shall consist of documentation from the office of the tax commissioner of the county that all taxes were paid during each year as the said taxes became due. If the owner is not able to establish that taxes have been paid on a yearly basis for a pre-HUD manufactured home, then that pre-HUD home shall not be allowed to be relocated and a mobile home permit shall not be issued. In addition, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide a certificate of ownership (title) which corresponds with the manufacturer's serial number stamped into the frame of the manufactured home. 
(3)  Only manufactured homes which have been approved by the department of housing and urban development may be allowed to be moved into the county, conditioned upon the inspection by and approval of the county building inspector. 
(4)  Any manufactured home, whether on an individual lot or in a manufactured home park/subdivision, shall be required to be skirted/underpinned at the time of installation. 
The underpinning shall consist of one (1) of the following: masonry, vinyl siding/panels or aluminum siding/panels or such other material as may be approved by the building inspector prior to installation. 
The following types of materials are not permitted to be used, including but not limited to, tin, wood (unless of natural decay-resistant types such as cedar), plastic sheeting or gypsum board (black board). 
The underpinning must be adequately secured to the manufactured house and, where necessary for stability, secured to the ground. Two (2) access doors are required to be installed in a manner which will provide adequate access for inspections and maintenance. Provisions must be made for adequate ventilation for the crawl space underneath the manufactured house. 
(d)  All manufactured homes placed in the county shall be installed so as to at least comply with Appendix H of the Standard Building Code. The installation of tiedowns and ground anchors may vary from model to model and may comply with manufacturer's specifications where said specifications exist. 
(e)  Permanent additions may be built onto or become a part of any manufactured home unit and may include porches, carports, decks, and additional living space prescribed by the technical codes and with proper permits. However, in no case shall one (1) or more manufactured homes be attached to an existing manufactured home as a temporary or permanent addition. 
(f)  All manufactured home installations shall provide an adequate means of entry (steps) at every door opening. In addition, all exterior doors shall be provided with a minimum three-foot by three-foot landing. Any porch or deck located thirty (30) inches or greater above the ground shall be provided with guardrails and handrails as indicated in the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. Steps higher than three (3) risers shall be provided with handrails. 
(g)  Electric service equipment (meter base and outside service disconnect switch) may be permanently attached to a manufactured home only when the home has a permanent masonry foundation. 
(h)  Each owner of a manufactured home located in the county shall obtain, at the time of purchase and each year thereafter that said home is located in the county, between January 1 and April 1, a county location decal (county tax sticker). Said decal shall be purchased from the tax commissioner of the county. No person shall be entitled to purchase a decal until he/she presents to the tax commissioner a certificate of title or other proof of his/her ownership. Failure to obtain a decal each year shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(i)  Any manufactured home which is damaged beyond repair, as determined by the building inspector, fire inspector and/or the nuisance officer of the county, by fire, natural disaster or man-made disaster, shall be removed and disposed of by the owner within ninety (90) days after said damage occurred. An extension of time not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days may be approved by the building inspector upon a showing of good cause for such extension. Any such dwelling not removed and disposed of during such time shall constitute a nuisance per se. 
(j)  No manufactured home may be occupied and no permit for the installation of utilities may be issued until such time as: 
(1)  The environmental health department has certified that such manufactured home is served by public sewer and has been connected to such public sewer; or 
(2)  The building inspector receives from the environmental health department a certificate indicating that any septic tank system installed to serve such housing has been installed in conformity with health regulations promulgated by the environmental health department and that said septic tank system is then operating properly. 
(k)  No manufactured home shall be used for any purpose other than as a dwelling unit, except in commercial applications when the unit has been specifically manufactured for that commercial purpose (i.e., office trailer on construction site). 
(Ord. of 12-5-95(1), Att. C, § I; Ord. of 12-16-97(1), § 1) 
Secs. 4-62—4-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of this article pertaining to housing generally, conventional housing, manufactured housing generally, individual manufactured housing, manufactured home parks, subdivisions, and required improvements, have been treated as repealed by an ordinance adopted December 5, 1995(1), which adopted the county's building codes, and by the county's zoning ordinance, adopted Apr. 21, 1992, codified herein as Ch. 18. Formerly, this article consisted of §§ 4-66—4-74, 4-86—4-103, 4-116—4-129, 4-141—4-149, 4-161—4-172, 4-181—4-191, 4-201—4-207, 4-221—4-226 and derived from an ordinance adopted Mar. 7, 1989, arts. I—IX, XI—XIII, as amended by an ordinance adopted May 15, 1990, §§ 1—6. 

Secs. 4-66—4-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 19, 2008, Art. 1, §§ A—D, Art. 2, §§ A—H, Art. 3, §§ A—C, Art. 4, §§ A—F, and Arts. 5 and 6 repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 4-251—4-262, §§ 4-271—4-275, §§ 4-301—4-304 and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. of 5-7-91, art. 1, §§ A—D; art. 2; art. 3, §§ A—H; art. 4, §§ A—D; art. 5, §§ A—D. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-251. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the county board of commissioners of Gordon County, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 4-252. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Gordon County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 4-253. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 4-254. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 4-255. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the director of building inspections interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 4-257. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
a.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
b.  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
c.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
d.  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 7, 1991 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 7, 1991. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 7, 1991 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 7, 1991. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. 
Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 6) 
Sec. 4-256. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 4-257. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
Gordon County Building  Planning and Development office. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 4-258. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 4-259. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 4-260. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 4-261. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 4-262. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Gordon County, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 4-263. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 4-264—4-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4-271. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The director of building inspections is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 4-272. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the director of building inspections on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 4-302(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The director of building inspections shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 4-273. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the director of building inspections shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-257, then the director of building inspections shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 4-272(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 4-272(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the director of building inspections shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 4-272(1)c. and subsection 4-302(2) or subsection 4-304(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director of building inspections shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the director of building inspections and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 4-274—4-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 4-301. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 4-302. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-301(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 4-273(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, 
Must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference subsection 4-301(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection(3)a.3. above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-257, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 4-303. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-257, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 4-257, then the director of building inspections shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one (1) foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharges. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-301(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The director of building inspections shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 4-304. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-257, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 4-301(4). 
The director of building inspections shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 4-272(1)c. and 4-272(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 4-305. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 4-306. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the one hundred-year floodplain or the five hundred-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the five hundred-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 4, § F) 
Secs. 4-307—4-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 4-311. - Variances. 
(a)  The county planning commission as established by the county planning commission shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the director of building inspections in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county planning commission may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the county planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and;; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The director of building inspections shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the county planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-19-08, art. 5) 
Secs. 4-312—4-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STRUCTURE NUMBERING 

Sec. 4-351. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Structure Numbering Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. I) 
Sec. 4-352. - Designation of street names and numbers. 
Streets now being maintained by the county and other public agencies within the unincorporated county shall in the future be named and numbered as now designated on the official map and official index of the county as amended by each implementing resolution. Every other street within the unincorporated county shown on the official index shall hereafter be referred to as designated on the official index for structure numbering purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. II) 
Sec. 4-353. - Designation of structure numbers. 
(a)  Structure numbers for dwelling units, places of business, industrial locations and all other structures and uses requiring same shall be assigned by: 
(1)  The emergency management director in conjunction with the United States Postal Service during the implementation stage of the system; and 
(2)  The emergency management director following the implementation phase of the system. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article. Such records may be maintained in data processing storage systems if so desired. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. III) 
Sec. 4-354. - Posting of designated structure numbers. 
(a)  The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall be notified in writing by the implementing agency of the number assigned to the same at any time after adoption of this article. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days after receipt of such written notification, the owner, occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall cause the same to be posted in either one (1) or two (2) locations depending upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the mailbox is located on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be affixed to the mailbox in letters two (2) inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the mailbox. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of the structure if so desired. 
(2)  If the mailbox is not on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be posted at two (2) locations: 
a.  On the mailbox as prescribed by U.S. Postal Service regulations; and 
b.  Either on the structure front if visible from the street or on an aboveground sign attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb cut. The numbers shall be two (2) inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the background. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of his structure if so desired. 
(3)  In the case that a building is served by two (2) or more driveways or curb cuts, the number shall be assigned and posted to the front entrance or driveway. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
(5)  In such cases where the assigned number cannot be posted as required above, the number shall be posted as prescribed by the emergency management director after consultation with the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. IV) 
Sec. 4-355. - Types of numbers. 
(a)  Two (2) types of numbers are used under this article: 
(1)  A primary number to be assigned to each street frontage of each parcel of land, whether or not the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel occupied by a dwelling unit, structure or active use and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified under section 4-354 of this article. Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
(2)  Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses coexist on the same parcel of land. Examples of parcels requiring secondary numbers include apartment projects, condominium projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the emergency management director shall work with the owner, manager, or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system under the following guidelines: 
a.  Existing numbered units and uses shall retain the present set of addresses with only the primary number being changed if the primary number is not in sequence with the overall system. 
b.  Buildings on a single parcel with more than one (1) and less than five (5) units may be given a number designation as requested by the owner. 
c.  A single building on a single parcel of land and with five (5) or more units may be given numerical designations such as Suite 5, Apartment 5, etc., if so desired. 
d.  Multiple buildings on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designations if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. Generally the number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. 
e.  Mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks and similar uses shall be given number designations for lots or sections and number designations for individual lots or sites. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. V) 
Sec. 4-356. - Implementation in stages. 
(a)  Because of the large and complex nature of the county and the existing numbering system now in place in some portions of the unincorporated county, this article shall be implemented in stages covering small sections of the entire area by the adoption of implementation resolutions for each section of the county. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the county not to change existing numbered addresses if the existing system follows a logical and expandable order. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. VI) 
Sec. 4-357. - Exempt and excluded structures. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life if destroyed by fire or other events. 
(b)  The following structures shall be excluded from the provisions: 
(1)  Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address such as a barn, poultry house, outbuilding or equipment storage buildings. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices or the normal work station of an employee shall not be exempt. 
(2)  Storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the property. Buildings used as dwelling units, offices, or the normal work station of an employee, or requiring a separate mailing address, shall be exempt. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. VII) 
Sec. 4-358. - New structure and lots. 
(a)  Structure numbers will be assigned to each new lot, tract or building site on the original drawings of a final subdivision plat, mobile home park plan, planned unit development or other plan requiring the approval of the county building inspector or by the zoning department. 
(b)  No building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit for any new or remodeled or repaired structure will be issued by the building inspector of the county following the implementation of this article in the affected area of the county until the owner, developer or builder has procured from the emergency management director the official structure number or numbers. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired, or use requiring such number, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the standards of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. VIII) 
Sec. 4-359. - Utility company compliance. 
Following the implementation of this article in any area of the county, all utility services regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission or any utility cooperative service organization shall withhold service from any building until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid structure number. 
(Ord. of 2-4-92, Art. IX) 
Chapter 5 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.; probate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq.; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 5-1. - Ten-percent penalty on levied fines. 
(a)  There is imposed on every fine levied in the superior court, state court, probate court, magistrate court, municipal court or other court of the county a ten-percent penalty as provided by the Jail Construction and Staffing Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq.). 
(b)  O.C.G.A. §§ 15-21-90 through 15-21-95 are adopted as a part of this section as if quoted herein verbatim. 
(Res. of 11-21-89) 
Sec. 5-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A motion passed Jan. 11, 2001, repealed in its entirety § 5-2 which pertained to the defense of civil actions against sheriff's department employees and derived from a resolution adopted Sept. 5, 1989. 
Chapter 5.5 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5.5-1—5.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5.5-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms: 
Locally declared emergencies. As used in this article, a "locally declared emergency" or a "declaration of local emergency" shall mean a declaration by the chair of the board of commissioners enacting some or all of the local emergency powers addressed in this article. 
State declared emergencies. As used in this article, a "state declared emergency" or a "state of emergency" shall mean a declaration by the Governor of an actual or impending emergency or disaster of natural or human origin, or pandemic influenza emergency, or impending or actual enemy attack, or a public health emergency, within or affecting Georgia or against the United States. A declaration of emergency by the Governor may enact some or all of the emergency powers, local or otherwise, addressed in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1)) 
Sec. 5.5-27. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business, or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state, and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chair of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for Gordon County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chair may request the Governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chair shall execute and file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than thirty (30) days unless renewed by the chair. The Gordon County Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the Governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chair shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Gordon County Emergency Management Agency ("EMA") Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
3.  The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the public's health, safety, or welfare, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. 
1.  State declared state of emergency. If the Governor declares a state of emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this article to become effective: 
a.  Section 4. Authority to Waive Procedures and Fee Structures; 
b.  Section 5. Registration of Building and Repair Services; and/or 
c.  Section 6. Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews. 
d.  Section 7. Overcharging for Goods, Materials, Services and Housing During a State of Emergency. 
2.  Locally declared state of emergency. If the chair declares a local emergency for the county, the chair may cause the following provisions of this ordinance to become effective: 
a.  Section 4. Authority to Waive Procedures and Fee Structures; and/or 
b.  Section 6. Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews. 
c.  Section 7. Overcharging for Goods, Materials, Services and Housing During a State of Emergency. 
If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 5.5-29 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chair of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response, or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters, and/or emergency medical shelters; 
4.  To transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of any county departments for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
5.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
6.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health, and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
7.  To suspend any ordinance, resolution, order, rules, or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules, or regulations of any county department, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule, or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
8.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purpose; 
9.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration, and any sections of this chapter that shall be in effect. 
Declaration of Local Emergency 
WHEREAS, Gordon County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; 
WHEREAS, the Governor has/has not declared a state of emergency for Gordon County; 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Gordon County Emergency Management Agency, there exists emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Gordon County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event, certain actions are required. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the Gordon County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Gordon County Code be implemented. [If deemed appropriate, choose and check from the following]: 
_______ Section 4. Authority to Waive Procedures and Fee Structures 
_______ Section 5. Registration of Building and Repair Services (to be effective only if the Governor declares a state of emergency) 
_______ Section 6. Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews 
_______ Section 7. Overcharging for Goods, Materials, Services and Housing During a State of Emergency 
_______ Section _____. [Any other emergency management ordinances such as an emergency purchasing ordinance, etc.] 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented:  _____ _____
[If deemed appropriate, select items from section 5.5-26(a)(4)c. or d. or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date]. 
[Signed] 
Chair, Gordon County Board of Commissioners" 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1)) 
Sec. 5.5-28. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the Gordon County Sheriff's Office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules, and regulations contained in this article and/or implemented by the chair or board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this ordinance, or with any code section, order, rule, or regulation made effective by the chair or board of commissioners upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this ordinance. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules, and regulations that are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this article, and/or are implemented by the board of commissioners during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this article may be enforced by the Gordon County Sheriff's Office, Gordon County Ordinance Office and any and all law enforcement assigned duties in Gordon County during a declared state of emergency. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1)) 
Sec. 5.5-29. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient, or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the board of commissioners without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Contracts entered into pursuant to this subsection for the physical performance of services as defined in O.C.G.A. § 13-10-90 may also require the submission of an E-Verify Contractor Affidavit. 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations, or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees, or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair, and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the Governor or Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary permits for mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1), § 4) 
Sec. 5.5-30. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating, or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity, except for out-of-state utility businesses and employees which are exempted as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-100(d)(1) and (2), must register with the Gordon County Building Inspector's Office and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $_____ per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past twelve (12) months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the Secretary of State, if required; 
(10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States if required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; 
(11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2, if required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; 
(12)  A signed and sworn affidavit, or statement or number as applicable, verifying the business's utilization of or exemption from the federal work authorization program as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the Governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three (3) months. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1), § 5) 
Sec. 5.5-31. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, welfare, or safety of persons or their property within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander, or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  All unincorporated areas of the county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners shall have discretion to impose re-entry restrictions on certain areas. The chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons (such as regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees and building contractors) as designated on a list compiled by the Gordon County Sheriffs' Office, Gordon County EMA, or directors of local public safety agencies. 
(e)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by offers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(f)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1), § 6) 
Sec. 5.5-32. - Overcharging for goods, materials, services and housing during a state of emergency. 
(a)  Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or upon the determination by the Chair of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, or subsequent recovery period in which Gordon County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Gordon County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(2)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 11-20-18(1), § 7) 
Chapter 6 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; solid waste, Ch. 15; wastewater, Ch. 17. 
State Constitution reference— Public health facilities and services, Art. IX, § II, Par. III; intergovernmental contracts for the care, maintenance and hospitalization of the indigent sick and for other services, Art. IX, § III, Par. I. 
State Law reference— County boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 6-26. - Finding of need. 
It is hereby resolved by the authority of the commissioner of roads and revenues of the county that there is need for a hospital authority to function in the county under the provisions of the Hospital Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.). 
(Res. of 6-14-49, § 1) 
Sec. 6-27. - Created. 
There is created and constituted hereby a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Hospital Authority of Gordon County with all rights, powers, privileges and immunities provided for in the Hospital Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.). 
(Res. of 6-14-49, § 2) 
Sec. 6-28. - Composition. 
The hospital authority of the county shall consist of a board of trustees of five (5) members. 
(Res. of 6-14-49, § 3; Res. of 4-20-89) 
Sec. 6-29. - Residency requirement. 
The members of the hospital authority shall be residents of the county. 
(Res. of 4-20-89) 
Sec. 6-30. - Vacancies. 
All vacancies in the hospital authority board of trustees caused by death, removal from the county, resignation or otherwise shall be filled within thirty (30) days after vacancy occurs by election of the remaining members of the board of trustees. 
(Res. of 6-14-49, §§ 1A, 5) 
Sec. 6-31. - Selection and appointment of members; terms. 
(a)  In the process of appointments to fill vacancies on the hospital authority, commissioners nominating and authority members selecting persons to fill vacancies shall give consideration to the choice of a licensed doctor of medicine or a registered nurse to fill such vacancy, unless at the time of such appointment a licensed doctor of medicine or a registered nurse currently serves on the authority. 
(b)  Selection of a member to fill a vacancy on the authority shall be in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The commissioners shall submit a list of three (3) eligible persons to the remaining members of the authority. 
(2)  The authority at its next regular meeting shall either select one (1) of the three (3) persons named in such list or decline to select any of the persons named in the list. If the authority declines to select any of the persons named on the list, it shall so notify the commissioners. 
(3)  If the authority declines to select any of the persons named on the list, the commissioners shall submit a second list of three (3) eligible persons, no one (1) of whom was named on the first list, to the authority. The authority, at its next regular meeting after receipt of the second list shall select one (1) of the three (3) persons named in the second list. 
(c)  Terms of office of the members shall be staggered as follows: The members shall be divided into three (3) classes with respect to the times for which they shall severally hold office. There shall be one (1) member of the first class who shall hold office until December 31, 1989. There shall be two (2) members of the second class who shall hold office until December 31, 1990. There shall be two (2) members of the third class who shall hold office until December 31, 1991. After the expiration of the initial term of office for members of each class, a member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(Res. of 6-14-49, §§ 4, 6; Res. of 4-20-89) 
Sec. 6-32. - Relinquishing office. 
All hospital authority trustees shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Res. of 6-14-49, § 7) 
Sec. 6-33. - Oath of members. 
Each hospital authority trustee shall, before assuming the duties of his office, take an oath to well and faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
(Res. of 6-14-49, § 2A) 
Secs. 6-34—6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Food service establishments, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-370 et seq. 

Sec. 6-56. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Food Service Regulation" of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(4), § 1-1) 
Sec. 6-57. - Adoption of state rules. 
The rules and regulations of the state department of human resources entitled and published as Chapter 290-5-14, Food Service, are hereby adopted as written in revised form of September 10, 1986, and as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(4), § 1) 
Sec. 6-58. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information being made known to the health officer or his designee, he shall cause a citation to be issued requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(c)  The county attorney is hereby authorized and directed to act as legal counsel for the health officer in any appeals from magistrate court to the superior court of the county regarding any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(4), § 1-4) 
Sec. 6-59. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing hazard and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court of the county or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(4), § 1-5) 
Secs. 6-60—6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOURIST COURTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-81. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tourist Court Regulation" of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(2), § 1.1) 
Sec. 6-82. - Adoption of state rules. 
The rules and regulations of the state department of human resources entitled and published as Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Courts, are hereby adopted as written in revised form of April 27, 1984, and as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-83. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information being made known to the health officer or his designee, he shall cause a citation to be issued requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(c)  The county attorney is hereby authorized and directed to act as legal counsel for the health officer in any appeals from the magistrate court to the superior court of the county regarding any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(2), § 1-4) 
Sec. 6-84. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing hazard and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court of the county or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(2), § 1-5) 
Secs. 6-85—6-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HEALTH HAZARDS 

Sec. 6-106. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Health Hazard Ordinance" of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-1) 
Sec. 6-107. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health hazard means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome. 
Health officer means the director of health of the county or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-3) 
Sec. 6-108. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to define specific types of health hazards in order to: 
(1)  Protect residents from annoyance and health hazards of certain aggravating circumstances; 
(2)  Delineate residents' responsibilities and prohibited acts in the community. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-2) 
Sec. 6-109. - Scope. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-4) 
Sec. 6-110. - Specific hazards enumerated. 
The following are specifically declared to be health hazards: 
(1)  Toilets, other sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers not in compliance with the rules and regulations of the county board of health or the state department of human resources. 
(2)  Conditions conducive to the excessive breeding of rodents, flies, mosquitoes or other insects and vermin in relation to surrounding conditions as determined by the health officer. 
(3)  Pollution of the air by gases, vapors, fumes, mists, dust or smoke in quantities sufficient to be disagreeable, discomforting or detrimental to health or well-being in relation to the conditions of the surrounding area, as determined by the health officer. 
(4)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept in such quantities or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well-being. 
(5)  Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals except under the following conditions: 
a.  Any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. 
b.  Such animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner: 

 
Horses, mules, asses or cows ..... 75  
Sheep or goats ..... 75  
Hogs ..... 900  
Dogs ..... 25  
Rabbits, guinea pigs or hamsters ..... 25  
Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl ..... 25  
c.  All such animals or fowl, except dogs in areas where confinement of dogs under the rabies control regulations does not apply, shall be kept in adequate enclosures or tethered. 
d.  Diseased animals or fowl which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health shall be isolated or destroyed as the health officer deems necessary. 
e.  In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards, poultry houses and similar commercial establishments the health officer may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
f.  Bona fide commercial agricultural enterprises are hereby exempt from the requirement of subsections (5)a., c. and d. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-5) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; solid waste, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 6-111. - Creating, maintaining, etc., hazard prohibited. 
No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a health hazard. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-6) 
Sec. 6-112. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information being made known to the health officer that any violation of this article is occurring, he shall cause a citation to be issued requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(c)  The county attorney is hereby authorized and directed to act as counsel for the health officer in any appeals from the magistrate court to the superior court regarding any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-9) 
Sec. 6-113. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating the terms of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this article, any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing hazard and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court of the county or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-6-90(1), § 1-10) 
Secs. 6-114—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SMOKING PROHIBITIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 10. 

Sec. 6-151. - Findings. 
(a)  The United States Surgeon General has stated that smoking of cigarettes and the use of tobacco products is the leading cause of premature death and disability in the United States of America. Medical evidence confirms that smoking of tobacco can be hazardous to the health of the smoker and nonsmoker. Medical research has confirmed that nonsmokers with chronic heart or lung disease can experience distress when exposed to sufficient concentrations of secondhand smoke. Many allergic individuals and healthy nonsmokers report discomfort when exposed to secondhand smoke. Recent medical studies provide sufficient evidence that long-term exposure to involuntary smoking may increase a nonsmoker's risk of developing serious lung disease. 
(b)  The board of commissioners finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare and safety of the county and its citizens: 
(1)  To provide a healthy, comfortable and productive working environment for its employees in the county's public buildings and facilities serving the public as well as in motor vehicles; 
(2)  To protect nonsmokers; 
(3)  To help employees to adjust to restrictions on smoking and the use of tobacco products; and 
(4)  To prohibit smoking of cigarettes and the use of other tobacco products in any county-owned or leased enclosed building space as well as in motor vehicle(s) occupied by at least one (1) nonsmoker. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 1) 
Sec. 6-152. - Prohibitions. 
From the effective date of this article smoking of cigarettes or the use of other tobacco products by whatever name known or called now or in the future is prohibited in any enclosed building space as well as in any motor vehicle occupied by at least one (1) nonsmoker owned or leased by the county and any of its departments, agencies, boards, authorities and commissions. For purposes of this section, the term "nonsmoker" shall mean any individual who declares that he/she does not smoke cigarettes or other tobacco products or has discontinued the smoking of cigarettes or other tobacco products. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 2) 
Sec. 6-153. - Conflict with other regulations. 
The provision of section 6-152 will in no instance conflict with any existing or future regulation(s) established for fire, health or safety reasons. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 3) 
Sec. 6-154. - Implementation. 
The board of commissioners is authorized and directed to promulgate and disseminate to all employees of the county the findings contained in this article and to provide for its implementation as follows: 
(1)  All departments, agencies, authorities, boards, commissions and elected officers will give this article wide dissemination to all employees; 
(2)  All prospective new county employees will be informed of this no-smoking and no-use of tobacco products policy before they are hired; and 
(3)  Signs will be placed in all appropriate spaces and county buildings indicating that smoking and the use of tobacco products are not allowed, with such signs to be uniform in language and color. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 4) 
Sec. 6-155. - Employee responsibility. 
All employees of the county share in the responsibility for adhering to and enforcing this policy. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 5) 
Sec. 6-156. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  (1)    ;hg;Any violations of section 6-152 or conflict concerning its implementation should be brought to the attention of appropriate supervisory personnel. In all cases the right of a nonsmoker to protect his or her health and comfort will take precedence over an employee's or nonemployee's desire to smoke or use tobacco products. 
(2)  Violations of this article by an employee may be subject to appropriate disciplinary action under the provisions of the county personnel ordinance [Chapter 10 of this Code], now in effect or as amended hereinafter. 
(b)  Any nonemployee of the county who continues to violate the provisions of section 6-152 after receiving an oral request to cease smoking of the cigarette or use of tobacco material from authorized personnel with offices located in the enclosed building or having responsibility for the motor vehicle shall be subject to citation to the magistrate court of the county and upon adjudication of guilt may be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation. The board of commissioners in implementing the provisions of this article shall designate authorized personnel in each department to make such oral requests as provided in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 4-26-94, § 6) 
Secs. 6-157—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRODUCTS USED IN THE PREPARATION OF METHAMPHETAMINE 

Sec. 6-181. - Definitions. 
Product used in the preparation of methamphetamine: Any compound, mixture, preparation or drug product containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, alone or in a mixture. 
(Ord. of 12-7-04, § 1) 
Sec. 6-182. - Display of products prohibited. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be openly displayed for sale in the unincorporated area of the county, but must be maintained behind the counter and distributed for sale only by the pharmacist, pharmacy technician, sales clerk or other retail distributor employee. 
(Ord. of 12-7-04, § 2) 
Sec. 6-183. - Requirements for purchase of products. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be dispensed, sold or distributed in the unincorporated area of the county without requiring the individual purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product to produce a photo identification showing their date of birth and sign a written log or receipt showing their signature and printed name, the date of the transaction, the type and amount of product purchased. 
The log or receipt must be maintained by the retailer or other person dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in preparation of methamphetamine for a period of three (3) years. 
The log shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The specific quantity of the products used in the preparation of methamphetamine purchased; 
(2)  Signature of the purchaser; 
(3)  The name and residential or mailing address of the purchaser (other than a post office box); 
(4)  The number of the purchaser's motor vehicle operator's license or other proper identification used at the time of the purchase; 
(5)  The date of such purchase; and 
(6)  The signature of an employee of the retail establishment as witness to the purchase and identification of the purchaser. 
In addition, the retailer or other person dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in the preparation of methamphetamine shall also include in the log a monthly total listing the amount of such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product which was purchased for sale in their establishment. 
(Ord. of 12-7-04, § 3) 
Sec. 6-184. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor punished in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq. and 36-1-20 and the Gordon County Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Calhoun/Gordon County Drug Task Force, the Gordon County Sheriff's Office, the Gordon County Ordinance Officer, and any other designated party. 
(Ord. of 12-7-04, § 4) 
Chapter 7 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; health, Ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 8; signs, Ch. 13; soil erosion and sedimentation, Ch. 14; solid waste, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 16; specific health hazards, § 6-110; zoning, Ch. 18. 
State Constitution reference— General powers of counties as to taxation and licenses, Art. IX, § IV. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. Tit. 10; business and occupational license taxes and fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. Tit. 43; specific, business, and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; registration and licensing of persons transporting motor vehicles and mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36. 

ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 7-1. - Business license required. 
For the year 2001 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated areas of Gordon County, Georgia, shall pay a regulatory fee and shall be issued a business license for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which license and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has permanent business location in Gordon County, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Gordon County, Georgia, such business registration shall be shown to the licensing official or representatives thereof, or to any law enforcement officer of said Gordon County upon request. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 1A) 
Sec. 7-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "Gordon County" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Gordon County, Georgia; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Gordon County, Georgia. Wherever the term "business" is used herein such term shall be construed to mean a business, trade, profession or occupation or practitioner thereof unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Business license means a license issued following a registration with and fee paid to Gordon County prior to conducting or transacting business within the unincorporated areas of Gordon County. For the purposes of this article, the term "business license" shall be a type of "regulatory fees." 
(2)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(3)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(4)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations. 
(5)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is the one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays a regulatory fee. 
(6)  Clerk means the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County. 
(7)  Licensing official means the county administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 7-3. - Regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses, trades, professions and occupations. 
(b)  The regulatory fee schedule or schedules for persons in businesses, trades, professions, and occupations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 or other provisions of Georgia law shall be adopted by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners and shall be amended from time to time. Said regulatory fee schedule shall be posted in the Gordon County Administration Office and at the building, planning and development office. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Purpose and scope of fee. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8 and 48-13-9 and is for regulatory purposes only. This article is not adopted as an occupational tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one regulatory fee for each of its locations. 
(2)  A business with multiple locations in the county will not be assessed more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for their business license for all their locations combined. 
(3)  No business license or regulatory fee shall be required for those businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations which Gordon County is not authorized to subject to regulatory fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 4A) 
Sec. 7-5. - Paying regulatory fee of business with no location in Gordon County, Georgia. 
A business license shall also be required on those businesses, trades and practitioners of professions or occupations which operate and conduct business within Gordon County even if said business, trade, profession or occupation does not have a location within Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 5A) 
Sec. 7-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
As part of the application process of obtaining a business license, each business operated within the unincorporated areas of Gordon County shall register said business with Gordon County. The business registration of each business operated within the unincorporated areas of Gordon County shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county and that line of business being noted by the county upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 6) 
Sec. 7-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 7) 
Sec. 7-8. - Imposition of fee. 
The regulatory fee imposed herein is for regulatory purposes only. Said fee shall be paid before commencing a business, trade or the practice of a profession or occupation as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 8) 
Sec. 7-9. - When fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such regulatory fee shall be for the calendar year 2001 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and fee shall be payable before commencing business and thereafter on January 1 of each year once the business has commenced and has received its initial license, and be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. Should any regulatory fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for ninety (90) days from the due date of the fee, unless otherwise exempted by state law or local ordinance, the person liable for the fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the fee due. In addition, interest on the regulatory fee due and payable after the due date shall be at the rate of one five-tenths (1.5) percent per month. 
(b)  The regulatory fee herein provided for shall be issued by the licensing official and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license shall, after said fee becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Payment of such fine may be enforced by the contempt powers of the court having competent jurisdiction. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available for the collection of regulatory fees due to Gordon County from persons subject to the fee who fail or refuse to pay the fee. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 9) 
Sec. 7-10. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business license is imposed by this article shall be exempt from said license requirement on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless said business is registered as a nonprofit organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. In such case, said business shall only be required to register with Gordon County and the fee shall be waived. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 10) 
Sec. 7-11. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 11) 
Sec. 7-12. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 12) 
Sec. 7-13. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the business license and registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any business, trade, profession, or occupation required to be registered without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 13) 
Sec. 7-14. - When registration and fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when fee delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all fees as provided herein before January 31 of each year, and on January 31 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 7-15. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties herein provided. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the licensing official, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said fee becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 14) 
Sec. 7-15. - Penalty of ordinance violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation in the discretion of the Magistrate Court of Gordon County, and may be subject to any and all additional remedies available by law for the collection of regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 15) 
Sec. 7-16. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed a regulatory fee, registration fee, or other type of regulation pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of O.C.G.A. title 46. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-3-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)  The following persons or businesses are exempted from the regulatory fee imposed by this article: 
(1)  Nonprofit social, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations for the purpose of operating fairs, circuses or carnivals for periods of time not to exceed one (1) week. 
(2)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of the state provided, however, that farm, milk or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this article. 
(3)  Established churches, religious, charitable and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes. 
(4)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the constitution or any statute of the United States or State of Georgia. Such persons shall possess and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the licensing official by application of a form provided by the same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this article or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the licensing official to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption so long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 16) 
Sec. 7-17. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time. Said amendment may increase or lower the fee rates, and said amendments to the fee schedule shall be posted as provided in section 7-3 above. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 17) 
Sec. 7-18. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore adopted where fees imposed under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of any ordinance heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such regulatory fee, registration fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 18) 
Sec. 7-19. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the licensing official to see that the provisions of this article relating to business licenses are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court of competent jurisdiction. It is hereby made the further duty of the licensing official to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often, as in his or her judgment, he or she may deem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 19) 
Sec. 7-20. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 20) 
Sec. 7-21. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 21) 
Sec. 7-22. - Conditions of issuance. 
The licensing official shall issue the certificate of license only: 
(1)  When satisfied that the business, etc., does not, and will not violate the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the county; 
(2)  Upon the fulfillment of the registration requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Upon the payment of the regulatory fee imposed by the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 22) 
Sec. 7-23. - Term of certificate or license; transfer. 
Licenses will be issued for a one-year period, except as otherwise herein specified. A license issued by the licensing official under the authority of this article, may be transferred or assigned, except as otherwise noted in this article, provided the person conducts the business for which the license was issued at the same place and pays Gordon County a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00). If the business is moved to a different location, with the same owner and operators, the license may also be transferred to the new location, by notifying the licensing official and payment of the transfer fee. In the event that the proper authorities are not notified, an additional ten (10) percent fee shall be charged for the transfer. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 23) 
Sec. 7-24. - Misrepresentation-deemed violation. 
No person shall use any deceitful means or misrepresentation in obtaining the license or certificate to do business in the county from Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § 24) 
Sec. 7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 7-26. - Annual tax levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 5-6-86, § 1) 
Sec. 7-27. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Res. of 5-6-86, § 2) 
Sec. 7-28. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the state revenue commissioner based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Res. of 5-6-86, § 3) 
Sec. 7-29. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than thirty (30) days after filing of the return prescribed by section 7-28 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-6-86, § 4) 
Secs. 7-30—7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Gordon County Community Antenna Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 1) 
Sec. 7-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person or company authorized to do business in the state submitting an application for a community antenna television system in the county or who operates a CATV franchise in the county as of the effective date of this article. 
CATV franchise means a community antenna television system franchise. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Gross subscriber revenues means all revenue derived directly or indirectly from all sources by a selected applicant(s) from its CATV system within the unincorporated areas of the county before any deductions or expenses whatsoever. Definition of gross subscriber revenues shall be expanded as may be allowed by future FCC rulings. 
System means the lines, fixtures, equipment, attachments and all appurtenances thereto which are used in construction, operation and maintenance of a community antenna television system. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 2) 
Sec. 7-53. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Each CATV franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the county may grant more than one (1) franchise for the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 3) 
Sec. 7-54. - Application for franchise. 
(a)  No CATV franchise shall be granted until the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the board of commissioners of the intent of the applicant to apply for a CATV franchise. 
(2)  All applications for a CATV franchise shall be in a form acceptable to the board which provides the information required herein. 
(3)  All applications for a CATV franchise must be approved by the board. 
(4)  If the applicant is not a corporation, its application shall contain the names and addresses of persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in its business operation and/or proposed CATV franchise sought by the applicant. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the proposed CATV franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a CATV franchise. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation not publicly held, as defined by the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of its officers, directors and shareholders, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation publicly held, as defined by the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which the applicant is incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of its officers and directors. 
(7)  The form of ownership of the facilities to be used in exercising the proposed CATV franchise. 
(8)  Any cable television system currently owned or operated by the applicant, its experience in operating and constructing such systems, any applications pending for other systems, and the general financial resources of the applicant as well as those specifically available for construction and operation of the proposed CATV system. 
(9)  Proposed services, including channel capacity, the number of channels to be included in basic services, the number of channels and types of services to be included in additional services, the number of two-way channels, the number of access channels and automated channels, facilities for local origination and a list of any additional services or facilities to be made available to the county and other public, institutional and community organizations. 
(10)  A schedule of the subscriber rates for each of the proposed services. 
(11)  The equipment to be included in the CATV system, the general routes of the feeder or trunk cable, the number and location of signal amplifiers to be used in redistributing signals, the proposed franchise area and the service schedule for the proposed franchise area. 
(12)  The design and construction plans and standards to be used in constructing or renovating the CATV system and the proposed construction and service schedule. 
(b)  All applications shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours. 
(c)  Any material misrepresentation in an application or the omission of any material representation, which omission renders the included representations misleading, whether done negligently or intentionally, shall be grounds for rejection of the application or termination of any CATV franchise granted on the basis of such application. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 4) 
Sec. 7-55. - Selection of applicants for negotiation. 
The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing to review the applications submitted under this article and after considering the applicant's character, financial, technical and other qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements, the board may negotiate with the applicant for the purpose of granting a nonexclusive CATV franchise. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 5) 
Sec. 7-56. - Negotiation of proposed franchise. 
Upon selection, the board of commissioners and the selected applicant shall proceed to negotiate and draft the terms and conditions of a CATV franchise which shall contain the minimum terms and conditions set out in the remainder of this article (provided a franchise is granted to the selected applicant). 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6) 
Sec. 7-57. - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
The selected applicant shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the county and to such reasonable regulation as the county shall by ordinance provide. The construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the selected applicant shall be in full compliance with the National Electrical Code as from time to time amended and revised, and in full compliance with all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, the county, the state and the United States government. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(I)) 
Sec. 7-58. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  Liability coverage. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the selected applicant and the county that the selected applicant shall save the county harmless from all loss sustained by the county on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system by the selected applicant. The selected applicant agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at all times during the term of the franchise sufficient liability insurance coverage to protect the county against any such claims, suits, judgments, executions or demands in a sum not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person in any one (1) claim, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to any one (1) accident or occurrence, and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage as to any one (1) accident or occurrence, or in such larger sums on all coverage as may be required of the selected applicant by any other public utility in the county and shall provide the county with proof of such insurance. 
(b)  Workers' compensation coverage. The selected applicant shall also maintain in full force and effect throughout the duration of its franchise sufficient workers' compensation insurance coverage to adequately and fully protect its agents and employees as required by law. 
(c)  Resident company and agent. All insurance policies and bonds as are required by this section shall be written by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business in the state. Certificates of all coverage required shall be promptly filed by the selected applicant with the county. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(II)) 
Sec. 7-59. - Conditions on street occupancy, system construction. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the selected applicant within the county shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of such streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, driveways or other surfacing, the selected applicant shall have prior approval of the board of commissioners and shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the county, replace and restore such places so disturbed in as good condition as before the work commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in a condition approved by the county for the full period of one (1) year; and if the selected applicant fails to do so, the county may undertake such restoration at the expense of the selected applicant. 
(c)  Relocation. If at any time during the period of the franchise the county shall lawfully select to alter or change the grade or alignment of any street, alley or other public way the selected applicant, upon reasonable notice by the county, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at its own expense. 
(d)  Placement of fixtures. The selected applicant shall not place any fixtures or equipment where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric, telephone or sewer and water lines, fixtures and equipment, and the locations by the selected applicant of its lines and equipment shall be in such a manner as to not interfere with the usual travel on the streets, alleys and public ways and the use of the same by gas, electric, telephone and water and sewer lines and equipment. 
(e)  Temporary removal of wires for building moving. The selected applicant shall on the request of the county temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings, but may reserve the right to recover its costs from the person or persons having the building. 
(f)  No property right. Nothing in the franchise shall grant to the selected applicant any right of property in the county-owned property, nor shall the county be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than, in the county's judgment, its own business or needs may require. 
(g)  Nonliability of county. The county shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the selected applicant caused by employees of the county in the performance of their duties, nor shall the county be held liable for the interruption of service by actions of county employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the county be held for the failure of the selected applicant to be able to perform normal service due to acts of God. 
(h)  Permits, easements and agreements. The county shall not be required to assume any responsibility for the securing of any permits or agreements with other persons or utilities. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(III)) 
Cross reference— Roads and highways, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 7-60. - Construction approval by county; correction of defects. 
Except for additional connections for ten (10) residences or less, unless the same involves the cutting of a road, the selected applicant shall not erect any pole, run any line, make any attachment nor shall any construction of any kind be commenced without the prior approval of the board of commissioners. The approval as referenced herein shall be in the form of a permit issued by the board upon approval of: 
(1)  Layout maps of the system authorized by the franchise showing plant routing, utility company poles to which the system facilities are to be attached and location of all trunk and distribution line amplifiers; or 
(2)  A certification by applicant that all attachment requests and subsequent approvals required have been obtained. 
The county shall have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the selected applicant to ensure the proper performance of the terms of the franchise. If the selected applicant should violate any of the terms of this article or any of the rules and regulations as may from time to time be lawfully adopted, the county shall immediately give the selected applicant thirty (30) days' written notice to correct such violation. If the selected applicant does not make the correction within thirty (30) days from the receipt of such written notice, the county may make such correction itself and charge the cost of same to the selected applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(IV)) 
Sec. 7-61. - Number of channels. 
(a)  The selected applicant shall maintain and relay to the subscribers to the system in the county not less than the number of channels provided to subscribers in the city from which the applicant originates transmission. 
(b)  Carriage of television signals shall be consistent with those allowed by FCC rules. In addition to television signals allowed by the FCC signal carriage rules, the system shall provide one (1) twenty-four-hour local service channel with local weather information and public service messages. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(V)) 
Sec. 7-62. - Prohibition from engaging in radio and television sales, service and repair. 
The selected applicant and any and all of its officers, agents and employees are specifically prohibited from engaging in the sale, service, rental or leasing of television receivers, radio receivers or television or radio receiver related parts and accessories with any person anywhere in the county, whether for a fee or charge, except for such special devices as may be necessary for the subscriber to receive the requested service. The selected applicant shall prohibit any of its officers, agents and employees from violating the terms of this section at all times, whether in the performance of the duties of the selected applicant or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(VI)) 
Sec. 7-63. - Public service, education service. 
(a)  Public service. The selected applicant shall provide, without charge, one (1) outlet to each public office building, recreation department building, fire station, police station and public and private school that is passed by its cable. If more than one (1) outlet is required at any of the locations, the selected applicant shall install at the cost of time and material only and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at the location. 
(b)  Educational service. The selected applicant shall reserve at least one (1) television channel for the use of educational institutions within the county for the origination of educational television telecasts and the interconnection of all of such educational institutions. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(VII)) 
Sec. 7-64. - Service standards. 
(a)  The selected applicant shall maintain and operate the system and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as now or hereafter may be established by the Federal Communications Commission or its successor. 
(b)  The selected applicant shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of the service wiring from the cable point of entrance to the TV set. 
(c)  The selected applicant shall investigate and resolve all subscriber complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment, malfunctions and similar matters expeditiously and in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The selected applicant shall during normal working hours have qualified personnel available to investigate and resolve subscriber complaints. 
(2)  Upon notification of a service complaint, the selected applicant shall dispatch a qualified employee to investigate the complaint and adjust, repair or replace equipment as necessary to resolve the complaint. The selected applicant shall not be responsible for malfunctions in any subscriber's radio or television receiver. 
(3)  Complaints shall be investigated and resolved within twenty-four (24) hours of notification. If upon investigation it is determined that the complaint cannot be resolved within twenty-four (24) hours due to circumstances beyond the control of the selected applicant, the subscriber shall be notified and given an estimation as to when the complaint will be resolved. 
(d)  The selected applicant shall be required to provide permanent service to any permanent-type residence within a period of ninety (90) working days from the initial request for service from potential subscribers when the area requesting service has an average of thirty (30) residences per contiguous mile with existing service. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(VIII)) 
Sec. 7-65. - Company rules. 
(a)  The selected applicant shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the selected applicant to exercise its rights and to perform its obligations under the franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all its subscribers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article and shall be filed with the county and shall be subject to the approval of the county. 
(b)  The selected applicant shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color, marital status or national origin. This requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection of training. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(IX)) 
Sec. 7-66. - Local office. 
The selected applicant shall throughout the duration of any franchise maintain an office open to the public during reasonable business hours and a system manager for performing services and meeting all requirements provided herein. The office shall be located within the county or within a fifteen-mile radius of the county line; if the office is located beyond the certified telephone area in which the system operates, a toll-free line shall be provided for subscribers. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(X)) 
Sec. 7-67. - County rules, control of rates and payments. 
The right is hereby reserved to the county to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this article and in existing applicable resolutions or ordinances, such additional regulations as the county may find necessary in the exercise of police power, provided such regulations by resolution or ordinance otherwise shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted. Except as otherwise herein limited, the county shall approve the rates and costs to the subscribers of the system in the county and the county shall have the right to set the amount of payments required of the selected applicant to the county. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XI)) 
Sec. 7-68. - Occupational licenses, taxes, etc. 
The selected applicant shall pay annually, in addition to the franchise fee, such ad valorem and personal property taxes, inventory taxes, occupational licenses, fees and service charges as shall be appropriate to that general classification of business as set forth by law. It is herewith noted the selected applicant is not classified as a public utility and therefore not subject to payment of any type of utility taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XII)) 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 7-69. - Rates to subscribers. 
The selected applicant may make such charges for its services as are reasonable. The selected applicant may increase these rates annually but no more than ten (10) percent per year, which percentage is cumulative up to, but not to exceed, thirty (30) percent without prior approval of the county. The applicant's subscribers located in the unincorporated areas of the county shall not be charged a greater rate than the applicants' subscribers located in the incorporated area from which the system originates for the same or equivalent service. A subscriber of the selected applicant may discontinue any service provided by the applicant at any time without further charge or penalty. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XIII)) 
Sec. 7-70. - Payments to county. 
(a)  Gross subscriber revenue tax. The selected applicant shall pay to the county the standard or franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received from its operations in the county in an amount not to exceed that amount authorized under applicable federal law and regulations. 
(b)  Manner of payment. All payments as required by the selected applicant to the county shall be made quarterly and shall be due within fifteen (15) days from first day of each calendar quarter unless the same shall fall on a weekend or legal holiday, in which event the same shall be paid on the next immediate work day. A late penalty of ten (10) percent shall be assessed on any payment made more than fifteen (15) days after the due date. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XIV)) 
Sec. 7-71. - Records and reports. 
The county shall have access at all reasonable hours to the selected applicant's records relating to subscriber revenue, which are deemed necessary by the county to determine compliance with this article and the contract between the selected applicant and the county. An annual summary report showing gross subscriber revenues received by the selected applicant from the operation of the system within the county during the preceding twelve-month period and such other information as the county may require in support of same shall be given to the county by the selected applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XV)) 
Sec. 7-72. - Transfer approval. 
The selected applicant shall not sell or transfer its plant or system or any portion thereof, nor any right, title or interest in the same, nor shall the selected applicant transfer any rights under the franchise to any other person without prior approval of the board of commissioners, which approval shall not be unreasonably or arbitrarily withheld. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XVI)) 
Sec. 7-73. - Duration of franchise. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be for such period of time as may be agreed upon between the selected applicant and the county and shall be subject to renewal by the county by negotiations upon reasonable terms with the selected applicant for an additional period. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XVII)) 
Sec. 7-74. - Penalties. 
(a)  Should the selected applicant, its successors or assigns violate any of the provisions of the franchise, any ordinance or any reasonable rules and regulations or other laws or should the selected applicant fail to promptly perform any of the provisions hereof, the selected applicant shall forfeit all its rights hereunder to the county after written notice and hearing before the board of commissioners or its duly appointed hearing officer to the selected applicant. The continuation of such violation, failure or default for a period of more than thirty (30) days after the hearing shall constitute default of the contract and loss of all rights and privileges thereunder. Failure to perform any of the provisions of the franchise shall constitute default on the part of the selected applicant, and upon default the selected applicant shall forfeit all of its rights and privileges under the franchise and at the option of the county have the agreement terminated without further notice, provided that acts of God or events or happenings beyond the control of the selected applicant shall not be grounds for termination. 
(b)  In the event of the bankruptcy or receivership for the selected applicant, all rights herein given to the selected applicant shall, at the option of the county, be forfeited and terminated. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XVIII)) 
Sec. 7-75. - Termination of negotiations. 
At any time the board of commissioners may terminate negotiations and begin negotiations with any other selected applicant or may select other applicants for negotiation. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XIX)) 
Sec. 7-76. - Granting of franchise. 
(a)  After negotiations with the selected applicant are completed and the selected applicant has met all requirements of the county, the board of commissioners may by contract, which shall include all terms and conditions negotiated by the county and the selected applicant, grant a CATV franchise to the selected applicant, which shall be nonexclusive. 
(b)  The county may issue as many CATV franchises as it deems appropriate without regard to any service area of any other CATV franchise. 
(Ord. of 11-21-89, § 6(XX)) 
Secs. 7-77—7-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MALT BEVERAGE, WINE AND LIQUOR ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 10, 2012, §§ 1(I—XXV), amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. IV, §§ 7-101—7-115, pertained to malt beverage and wine licenses and derived from Ord. of 10-15-91, §§ I—XV; Mo. of 1-17-95; Ord. of 7-1-97, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-16-01; Ord. of 8-19-03, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-07, §§ A—D; Ord. of 5-20-08, §§ 1, 2. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 7-101. - Short title, purpose and privilege. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Malt Beverage, Wine and Liquor Ordinance of Gordon County." The purpose of this article is to provide procedures, rules and regulations governing the issuance of licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages and for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages in the appropriate establishments as allowed by this article. 
Any license which is issued allowing for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated area of Gordon County may be issued by the commission pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth in this article. The holding of any such license or licensees is declared to be a privilege and not a right. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § I) 
Sec. 7-102. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural number. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any person that has obtained an off-premises catering license to sell and/or distribute alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Authorized catered function means an event for which an event permit has been issued pursuant to section 7-109 of this article for the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption at such event. 
Bona fide nonprofit civic organization means an entity which is exempt from Federal Income Tax pursuant to the provisions of subsection c. of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons. 
Commission means the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County. 
Consumption on the premises means the sale or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. The license issued to such person shall be known as a "Consumption on the Premises License." 
Department means the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means all beverages, containing any alcohol obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of two hundred thirty-one (231) cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Individual means a natural person. 
Keg means a barrel or bulk container of malt beverage commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
License officer is the Gordon County Clerk or designee. 
Licensed premises means the building and/or real property described in the license application as approved by the county commission where the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wines is permitted to be sold. 
Licensed retailer means any person (not a producer) selling or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine in an original package not for consumption on the premises where sold and holding a valid license issued by Gordon County and the State of Georgia. 
Licensed wholesaler means any person (not a producer) who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for purposes of resale to licensed retailers, to licensed wholesalers, or to persons holding a consumption on the premises license. 
Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverages obtained by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such product in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container, as delivered by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer. 
Package store means a store licensed by Gordon County and the State of Georgia to sell distilled spirits not for consumption on the premises. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or any combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
Wine means all alcoholic beverages containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruit, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § II) 
Sec. 7-103. - In certain retail establishments only—For consumption on premises. 
Alcoholic beverages, wine or malt beverages shall not be sold at retail for consumption on premises except in the following types of businesses: 
(1)  In restaurants, other than fast food restaurants, serving prepared food which is offered to the general public and where chairs, tables and counters are provided to seat and service twenty-five (25) or more persons. Such establishments shall be located in zoning districts that permit restaurants and shall meet the criteria set out in this article concerning the hours of sale. 
For the purpose of this article, a fast food restaurant is defined as a restaurant that derives more than fifteen (15) percent of its sales by use of a carry-out window serving persons outside the building, who are either on foot or who are the occupants of motor vehicles. 
(2)  In hotels or motels, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public to be a place where food is served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate rates to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which forty (40) or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations for guests. 
(3)  In lounges where seating accommodations are provided for not less than twenty-five (25) persons, where such establishments are located in zoning districts where such establishments are permitted or in a district where existing lounges exist as a nonconforming use. In addition, the lounge shall meet the criteria set out in this article concerning the application process. 
(4)  In private clubs authorized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, or a bona fide association of individuals organized for fraternal purposes, conducted solely for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries, operated on the lodge system with ritualistic form of work, having a representative form of government and at least seventy-five (75) members paying monthly dues, where no part of the net earnings of which shall inure to the benefit of any shareholder or member, provided further that no member, officer or agent, or employee of the club is compensated, directly or indirectly, by any form of commission or other compensation based on the amount of profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. 
(5)  In bowling alleys, provided that the following rules and regulations are followed: 
a.  No alcoholic beverages will be consumed on or upon the bowling lanes or the approach area of such lanes, but only in a seating area set aside for spectators located separately and apart from the bowling lanes; 
b.  No alcoholic beverages will be served in any part of the bowling alley prior to 12:00 noon on Monday through Saturday; and 
c.  No alcoholic beverages will be sold on Sundays. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises, in addition to the places set out in subparagraphs (1) through (5) of this section, may also be sold in refreshment stands or clubhouses located within the boundaries of golf courses or race tracks. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § III) 
Sec. 7-104. - Unlawful practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any adult entertainment establishment licensee, as defined in the Gordon County Adult Entertainment Ordinance and issued pursuant to that article, to serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine upon the premises of that said licensee. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages of any kind to permit, perform, promote, advertise, stage, suffer, or in any way to allow any person to expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities in, on or about the licensed premises. 
Definitions. As used in this section, these terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral and anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, or oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § IV) 
Sec. 7-105. - Sale of malt beverages and wine—Not for consumption on premises. 
No malt beverages or wines shall be sold at retail except as follows: 
(1)  In retail stores devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products to the general public and located in zoning districts in which food or convenience stores are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where existing food or convenience stores exist as a nonconforming use. In order for a store to be devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products, the building must contain at least one thousand (1,000) square feet and seventy (70) percent of the retail floor area of the building must be devoted exclusively to the sale of groceries or related grocery items. For the purpose of this article, groceries and related grocery items are defined so as to exclude any drinks containing any amount of alcohol. 
(2)  In a facility duly licensed by Gordon County to sell at retail malt beverages or wines in the original unbroken package. 
(3)  No malt beverages or wines shall be displayed for sale or sold on the licensed premises, other than in an air-cooled cooler which is operated by means of electrical current, except that this section shall not apply to malt beverages or wines which are stored and displayed at room temperature in the original package. 
(4)  All licensees selling kegs of malt beverages shall, at the time of the such sale, record the serial number of the keg along with the name and address of the buyer. Further, the licensee shall require the buyer to provide documentation, in the form of a driver's license, etc., to verify the identity of the buyer. Said record shall be maintained for a period of six (6) months, and shall be provided to the Gordon County Sheriff's Department upon request. For the purposes of this subsection, the form utilized the Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tobacco Division, properly filled out, shall be sufficient to satisfy the information retention requirements herein. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § V) 
Sec. 7-106. - Hotel in-room service license. 
Any hotel, motel, inn or other establishments which meet the requirements set out in subsection 7-103(2) is hereby authorized to provide in-room service as defined in this section. In order to qualify for a hotel-in-room service, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicant must be the current holder of a retail dealer license, a retail consumption deal license, a retail beer dealer license or a retail wine dealer license; provided, however the applicant may only qualify for a hotel-in-room service license for the type of alcoholic beverage for which he holds a current license. 
(2)  Applicant shall apply on a form provided by Gordon County specifying the type of in-room service license sought (beer, wine, distilled spirits or any combination thereof) together with any other forms, documentation, or other information required by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. 
(3)  A hotel in-room service licensee shall be authorized to deliver alcoholic beverages, either by the package or by the drink, if the hotel holds a valid in-room service license, by a hotel employee to a registered guest's room when such distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages, at the time of the delivery; provided further, however, such sale shall be evidenced by a signed receipt indicating which guest ordered alcoholic beverages, indicating the identification and quantity of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine actually delivered; provided, however, that the hotel may provide the guest with a credit for any unused and unopened alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  All hotels having in-room service shall comply with all requirements promulgated by the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia dealing with storage of alcoholic beverages and records required to be maintained in order to provide hotel in-room service. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to restrict or prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by hotel guests in quantities otherwise permitted by O.C.G.A. tit. 3. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § VI) 
Sec. 7-107. - Regulations for operation of business. 
(a)  Hours of operation. The following hours of sale are hereby established for the alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine: 
(1)  No sale of alcoholic beverages by the package and/or wine shall be allowed except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekdays and on Saturdays. 
(2)  No sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be allowed except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on weekdays and on Saturdays. 
(3)  In the event that a licensed business is open for less than the hours stated in the preceding paragraph, the sales of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to those regular store hours. However, in no event shall sales be made during hours other than described in the preceding paragraph. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine sold for consumption on the premises, shall not be sold on Sundays. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages either in the unbroken package or by the drink for consumption on premises, may be sold on a primary or election day; provided however, that no such sale shall take place within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during such time as the polls are opened. 
(b)  Advertising. A licensee may display at his place of business illuminated or unilluminated signs, using letter not larger than eight (8) inches in height, flat against the outside of the building, below the roofline, bearing the words "beer," "wine," "malt beverage," "package store," or any combination thereof, together with the trade name of the retail dealer. In addition to such signs flat against the outside of the building, the retail dealer may display at a location on the tract of property upon which the business is located, but not affixed to the building, one (1) illuminated or unilluminated sign using the letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height bearing the words "Package store" and the trade name of the retail dealer. Any such advertising done by the licensee at his place of business shall not be inappropriate for the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(c)  Minors. 
(1)  Any license holder, agents or employees of license holders selling alcoholic beverages to a minor, as provided by Georgia law, shall have his license suspended for not less than thirty (30) days and may be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). The commission, in its discretion, may suspend said license, depending upon the severity of the offense as evidenced by the facts in each case, including, but not limited to, consideration of prior violations of law by the license holder. In the event the commission determines that the license holder and/or his agents and/or employees have sold an alcoholic beverage to an underage person or persons on at least two (2) separate occasions within a five-year period, said license shall be suspended for a period of not less than ninety (90) days and the license holder fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). For a third violation within a five-year period, said license shall be permanently revoked. 
(2)  License holders may not allow a person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell alcoholic beverages. Provided however, this article shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. In addition, persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age may be employed by hotels and/or restaurants where their duties are not in any way involved with the preparation of, taking orders for, selling, or the service of any alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as defined by state law, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever in violation of this article or any other applicable laws. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage as defined herein in the unincorporated area of Gordon County. 
(6)  It shall not be considered a violation of this article for a person who is under the minimum age to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided by state law, to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage if such person is at the time bona fide acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(d)  Gross sales requirements. 
(1)  Retail and consumption licenses may be revoked if gross sales of groceries and food products fall below fifty (50) percent of the combined business volume of groceries, food products and alcoholic beverages sold monthly for three (3) consecutive months; provided, however, this section shall not apply to retail package stores not offering groceries and food products for sale. 
(2)  Each retail and consumption licensee, except those exempted in paragraph (1) above, shall furnish to the license officer on a monthly basis an affidavit under oath, showing the gross sales of groceries and food products (excluding sales of alcoholic beverages), the gross sales of alcoholic beverages and the gross sale of other merchandise for the preceding month. This affidavit shall be on a form furnished by the license officer. The licensee shall attach a copy of the state sales and use report for the same period to the affidavit. 
(3)  These reports shall be confidential. 
(e)  Sundays and Christmas Day. 
(1)  Except as specifically authorized by law, no person knowingly and intentionally shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on Sundays or Christmas Day. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold on any election day, subject to all other provisions of this article, and notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(f)  Drinking of alcoholic beverages by employees at outlets. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee of a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages to drink any alcoholic beverages while at such licensed location or to be present at such location in an intoxicated condition. Permitted violations of this section by the licensee, or repeated violations, shall constitute grounds for a suspension, revocation and refusal to renew such license or other action with regard to such license. 
(g)  Miscellaneous regulations. 
(1)  License holders shall not sell alcoholic beverages on the license premises to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
(2)  License holders shall not permit any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace on the licensed premises. 
(3)  License holders shall not sell, offer for sale, posses or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverage for which a license holder is not authorized to sell under his license. The license holder shall not allow "brown bagging" on the license premises. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or offered for sale through vending machines on the license premises. 
(5)  License holders shall not permit the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages in automobiles or other vehicles, or anywhere else outside the main building or accessory thereto in which the business of such licensee is operated. 
(6)  License holders shall keep the licensed premises free and clear of cans, bottles, paper and other debris. 
(7)  Deliveries of alcoholic beverages shall only be made to licensed premises and shall be made only by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from Gordon County to deliver such beverage in the county. 
(8)  No retail license holder shall accept delivery of alcoholic beverages from any wholesale dealer unless the wholesale dealer has fully complied with the state laws regulating and taxing the sale of such beverages at wholesale. 
(9)  No retail or consumption license holder shall deliver alcoholic beverages at any location other than the licensed premises. 
(10)  All licensees shall store all alcoholic beverages in their possession only on the premises for this the license is issued. 
(11)  License holders of retail package licenses shall require that the alcoholic beverages purchased be placed in an opaque container before being removed from the store. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the purchase of a twelve-pack or larger container. 
(12)  Every license holder shall have available on the license premises a copy of this article and shall be responsible for compliance with this article by all persons on the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § VII) 
Sec. 7-108. - Required for sale or possession for sale and possession for consumption on premises. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine when such person does not hold a valid license issued by Gordon County and the State of Georgia to sell or possess for sale such items. It shall also be a violation of this article for any business, as defined by the Ordinances of Gordon County, Georgia, to permit any person to consume alcoholic beverages of any kind on the premises of such business without first securing an alcoholic beverage license and/or event permit as provided by this article; except that the following shall not be regulated hereby: 
(1)  Private meetings of employees of any such business and not more than five (5) non-employees; and 
(2)  Possession of alcoholic beverages by hotel guests in quantities otherwise permitted by O.C.G.A. tit. 3 and the rules and regulations of the department of revenue. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § VIII) 
Sec. 7-109. - Alcoholic beverage catering and special event permits. 
(a)  Off-premises license issued by Gordon County. Any person that holds a valid license issued by Gordon County to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (as provided by this article) may be issued an off-premises catering license that permits said person to sell and/or distribute alcoholic beverages by the drink off-premises at an authorized catered function. Any person seeking an off-premises catering license shall make application therefore, which shall be processed and decided according to the same guidelines set forth for other licenses under this chapter, including payment of the application fee and annual license fee set forth in sections 7-113 (processing application) and 7-115 (fee scale). Upon issuance of an off-premises catering license, an event permit as set forth in this section shall be required for each authorized catered function. 
(b)  Off-premises license issued by other jurisdictions. If a person is licensed by a municipality located within Gordon County to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises, then that person may apply to Gordon County for a off-premises catering license, pursuant to the requirements of this article, allowing such person to sell and/or distribute alcoholic beverages by the drink at an authorized catered function, provided that such person obtains an event permit for each function as set forth in this section. 
(c)  Bona fide nonprofit civic organization. A bona fide nonprofit civic organization (hereinafter referred to as "nonprofit civic organization") may distribute alcoholic beverages by the drink at an authorized catered function without alcoholic beverage license, provided that such nonprofit civic organization first obtains an event permit for each function as set forth in this section. 
(d)  Event permit application. Any person authorized under paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section to sell and/or distribute alcoholic beverages at an authorized catered function shall apply for an obtain an event permit issued by the Gordon County Building, Planning and Development Office prior to serving alcohol at such function. Applications should be submitted at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the event and shall include: 
(1)  The name of the alcoholic beverage caterer (including license number) or nonprofit civic organization, and the name and phone number of the representative for same who will be at the event; 
(2)  A plan of the event, which includes: (1) the date, location and hours of the event; (2) the number of persons expected to be in attendance; (3) the location of guest parking; and (4) whether security, valet parking, or additional restroom facilities will be provided. 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the host or sponsor of the event, including the name and telephone number of the representative of the host or sponsor who will be at the event. 
(4)  Whether food is being provided by the applicant, and if not, the name and telephone number of the person providing food at the event; 
(5)  Any alcoholic beverage caterer not licensed by Gordon County shall also be required to submit: (1) the name of the local jurisdiction issuing the off-premises catering license to the applicant; (2) a photocopy of the applicant's off-premises catering; and (3) payment of a non-refundable fifty dollar ($50.00) event permit fee; and 
(6)  A nonprofit civic organization shall provide a copy of the Internal Revenue Service's determination letter (or other official correspondence) recognizing the organization's federal tax exempt status under subsection c. of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
(e)  Event permit application review. Within ten (10) business days after receipt of an application for an event permit, the Gordon County Building, Planning and Development Department, in consultation with the fire, road, health and sheriff's departments, shall either approve or deny the event permit and communicate the same in writing to applicant. An event permit may be denied for any of the following reasons or combination of reasons: 
(1)  The applicant, and/or event host or sponsor does not meet the requirements for an event permit or has on prior occasion(s) violated or failed to comply with this article or with any state rules or laws regarding alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  The event location is a site where a violation of this article or the state laws or rules regarding alcohol has previously occurred; 
(3)  The plan of the event as proposed is likely to restrict and/or congest traffic on any of the public roads, rights-of-way, or sidewalks in the immediate vicinity of the event, or is likely to present a danger to the health and safety of guests at the event or members of the public; 
(4)  The plan of the event as proposed is likely to cause a disturbance of the peace at the time of the event, or is likely to intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the event; and 
(5)  The plan of the event as proposed is inconsistent with the uses of or is prohibited at the event location. 
(f)  Event requirements. All authorized catered functions permitted under this section and all alcoholic beverage caterers and nonprofit civic organizations receiving an event permit hereunder shall be subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
(1)  An alcoholic beverage caterer may sell and/or distribute only those alcoholic beverages that are authorized by that person's alcoholic beverage license; 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may only be served at the location and on the date(s) specified in the event permit. Event permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days; 
(3)  Food, the total cost of which must exceed the total cost of the alcohol served, must be served at the event; 
(4)  Copies of the event permits shall be posted and/or maintained at the front door or entrance of the event location at all times during the event. Alcoholic beverage caterers must also carry a copy of the caterer's off-premises catering license, copy of the event permit, and any necessary state documents and permits in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event; 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages may only be served between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight), except for events held on sites zoned for residential uses where only four (4) events may be held per calendar year and alcoholic beverages may only be served between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 10:00 p.m. 
(6)  No event permit will be issued for an event on Sunday allowing for the sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  The service of alcoholic beverages is subject to compliance with state laws and regulations regarding service of alcoholic beverages at such an event, including the receipt of any necessary state permits and filing of reports with the state revenue commissioner; and 
(8)  Alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by Gordon County shall pay excise taxes on the sale of alcoholic beverages, as calculated under this article and provide a report to the Gordon County Finance Department on or before the time when other excise taxes are due for such licensees, while alcoholic beverage caterers not licensed by Gordon County shall pay excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the county, as calculated under this article, and provide a report to the finance director within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the event. In addition, to the information required to determine the amount of tax due, the report shall state the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the event. 
(g)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages off the premises of such person's business without an off-premises catering license and event permit as set forth in this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding an off-premises catering license and/or event permit to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in a manner inconsistent with such license, permit, or the requirements or conditions for authorized catered functions set forth in this section. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages in violation of this section or any other provision of this article regarding alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this section is intended to prohibit anyone from hosting a private function at his or her personal residence where the host provides alcohol to guests free of charge or permits the otherwise legal consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(h)  Appeals. Any applicant who is denied an event permit by the Gordon County Building, Planning and Development Department shall have the right to appeal that decision to the Gordon County Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed within five (5) business days of the denial of said event permit. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § IX; Ord. of 8-21-12, § 1) 
Sec. 7-110. - Application on form prescribed by board of commissioners. 
Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application therefore on a form to be furnished by the board of commissioners, and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits and other supporting data as required thereby. Any knowingly, untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information contained in any such application shall be cause for revocation of the same. Each application shall be filed together with a certified check, cash, money order or cashier's check in payment of the license fee, and if an initial application, the investigation fee required by section 7-113. The initial license fee shall be paid by cashier's check. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Where the owner of such business is an individual (a natural person), the application shall be made in that name and the complete address of the applicant, together with applicant's social security number, shall be listed. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a domestic corporation lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the State of Georgia, or any foreign corporation lawfully registered under the laws of the State of Georgia to do business in this state, the applicant may be permitted to apply for such license in the name of the corporation as registered in the office of the secretary of state. The applicant shall provide the licensing officer with the name of its agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of this state and also provide the licensing officer with the address of its registered office. 
(3)  The written application for a license on file with Gordon County shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current with correct information at all times. The failure to maintain a current license application shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(4)  The commission may, in the exercise of its discretion, require a personnel statement, containing information concerning the employees or agents of an applicant, for licensing purposes. 
(5)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a felony of the owner, agent, or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a misdemeanor of the owner, agent, or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, in any form; gambling or tax law violations. 
(7)  The license application shall list the names of any persons having an interest in the operation of a proposed licensed premises or control over or ownership interest in such proposed licensed premises. Such person must meet the same requirements as set for this in this article for the licensee. 
(8)  An accurate sketch or diagram drawn to scale showing the location of the building, the area thereof to be used, and the property lines of the real property where the applicant proposes to carry on the business of selling alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine. The diagram shall also show the location of all churches or recognized places of worship and schools in the immediate area, and the distance between the property line of the proposed place of business and the property line of school, churches or recognized places of worship as measured along a straight line. The license officer may require a statement from a civil engineer or registered land surveyor at the applicant's expense certifying the correctness of the distances shown on the diagram or sketch. 
(9)  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, and the location thereof. 
(10)  If the proposed licensed premises is not in existence or requires substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and working drawings showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises and the construction proposed to be carried out by the applicant and the anticipated time for completion of said construction or renovation. 
(11)  As a prerequisite to the issuance to any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant or any managing officer. 
(12)  Such other information as the license officer, under the direction of the board of commissioners, may require. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § X) 
Sec. 7-111. - Consideration for a license. 
In determining whether any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of this article, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, and mental capacity to conduct this business, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he or she has resided, and whether applicant is likely to maintain the operation of the business for which he or she is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
(2)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as it pertains to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)  Whether a person has previously had a similar license suspended or revoked and the reason therefore. 
(5)  The board of commissioners shall also give consideration to such other factors as may affect the health and general welfare of the unincorporated areas of Gordon County, to include the type of license applied for, the effect of that license will have on schools, public parks, and churches in the area, the effect the granting of the license will have on existing land uses in the area, the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for the particular use sought, and the congestion of roads and streets. These items shall receive reasonable consideration with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, and sustaining the stability of neighborhood property values. 
(6)  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the board of commissioners that such license or application fails to meet any of the factors or requirements of subsection (5) of this section or in any case where such a decision was made because of the undesirability of the location itself, no application can be made until at least one (1) year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked, or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one (1) year after a final unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the board of commissioners that such licensee or applicant fails to meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (4) of this section or in any case where such a decision was made because of the ineligibility of the applicant to receive or the licensee to retain an alcoholic beverage license, that applicant or former licensee may not apply for an alcoholic beverage license in Gordon County until at least one (1) year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one (1) year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XI) 
Sec. 7-112. - Persons prohibited from holding licenses. 
Licenses shall not be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien. 
(2)  A person who has in Georgia or any other jurisdiction been convicted of a misdemeanor or a violation of a municipal or county ordinance involving driving under the influence of intoxicants or drugs, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge of the same within the preceding two (2) years. 
(3)  A person who has in Georgia or any other jurisdiction been convicted of a felony, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any charge of the same within the preceding five (5) years. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted or pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond for a violation of a law or ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages or the sale or possession of a controlled substance within the preceding five (5) years. 
(5)  A partnership, unless all partners qualify. 
(6)  A corporation, unless all officers and stockholders qualify. 
(7)  A person whose place of business is managed, operated or owned by a person who could not acquire a license hereunder, except as to the residence requirements herein above provided. 
(8)  Any person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine has been revoked by a licensing authority, during the immediately preceding five (5) years. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XII) 
Sec. 7-113. - Processing application. 
(a)  All applications filed with the license officer after investigation of the fitness of the applicant and the proposed location shall be approved or disapproved by the board of commissioners at a public meeting. In cases where applications are disapproved, the clerk of the board of commissioners shall return the amount of the fee submitted with the application to the applicant (excluding in the case of new applications, the investigative fee). In cases where such applications are approved by the commission, the commission shall issue a proper license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the particular business and at the particular location applied for. All new license applications shall, in addition to the license fee, include a non-refundable fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to cover the cost of the investigation into whether or not the applicant should be granted the license applied for. Applicants for renewals of licenses shall submit a renewal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the annual license renewal application. 
(b)  Copies of each application received shall be forwarded to the following offices for their recommendations concerning the proposed application: (1) Gordon County Office of Building, Planning and Development; (2) Gordon County Sheriff's Department; (3) Gordon County Fire Department; (4) Gordon County Road Department; and (5) Gordon County Environmental Health Department. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing on the application for the license shall be published, in the official newspaper of Gordon County wherein the legal advertisements are published, once a week for four (4) weeks prior to the meeting at which the application is to be presented and considered by the commission. After the application is complete and all information is received by the license officer, a public hearing will be scheduled on the application by the commission. In addition, if the proposed location does not have an existing license, a sign shall be posted by the license officer on the premises at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  Upon receiving the application, the commission shall, at the next regular meeting of the commission, read such application for alcoholic beverage licenses and shall approve or deny such application. Such action may be tabled, however, should additional information be required by the commission before acting upon the application. 
(e)  The commission shall have full power to determine whether the applicant for a license under the provision of this article is a fit and proper person to operate the type of business involved, and whether the location of such business is proper and in the best interest of Gordon County, and the commission's determination of these requirements shall be final, except where a right of appeal exists under applicable law. 
(f)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XIII) 
Sec. 7-114. - Initial application and temporary license. 
(a)  Persons making an application for a license to operate an existing licensed premises may be issued a temporary license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days by the commission. Before a temporary license is issued, the applicant must have filed a complete application, and the following documents and material must be furnished to the commission: 
(1)  A valid state application with all questions answered which indicates that applicant is eligible to hold the license sought; 
(2)  When preliminary records check indicates applicant is eligible to hold license; and 
(b)  All persons making an application for an initial license shall be required to attend the hearing on such application and to answer such questions and provide such information as the commission deems necessary and proper. The applicant's presence at the hearing to issue a provisional license may not be required when the applicant is suffering under a hardship or extenuating circumstances that prevent the applicant's attendance, such as a serious health condition of the applicant or a member of the applicant's immediate family, or the death of a member of the applicant's immediate family, or acts of God. If the applicant fails to appear at such hearings, and does not qualify under the excepting circumstances in this paragraph, the application shall be deferred to the next meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the next meeting, the application shall be treated as having been withdrawn. 
(c)  The issuance of any provisional license pursuant to the above conditions is within the discretion of the board of commissioners and such temporary license may be withdrawn by the board of commissioners at any time without notice or hearing, if final record check, including the response to the fingerprint search, shows the applicant was not entitled to the license issued. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XIV) 
Sec. 7-115. - Fee scale. 
Before such license shall be granted, the applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following scale: 
(1)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages shall pay to Gordon County at the time of the application the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as an annual license fee for operation for one (1) calendar year at one (1) location or one (1) business where the product will be sold. However, if the applicant is a nonprofit private club as defined in this article, then the annual license fee for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of wine shall pay to Gordon County at the time of the application the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) as an annual license fee for operation for one (1) calendar year at one (1) location or one (1) business where the product will be sold. However, if the applicant is a nonprofit private club as defined in this article, then the annual license fee for a retail package license for the sale of wine issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(3)  The applicant for a retail license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall pay to Gordon County at the time of the application the sum of one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) as an annual license fee for operation for one (1) calendar year at one (1) location or one (1) business where the product will be sold. However, if the applicant is a nonprofit private club as defined in this article, then the annual license fee for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and wine issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be in the amount of eight hundred seventy-five dollars ($875.00). 
(4)  The applicant for a consumption on the premises malt beverage and/or wine and/or distilled spirits shall pay to Gordon County at the time of application the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as an annual license fee for operation for one (1) calendar year at one (1) location or one (1) business where the product is sold. 
(5)  Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages or wine, licensed by the state, or the agent of such wholesale dealer, may be granted a license upon payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually for malt beverages and/or one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually for wine and/or one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually for distilled spirits for distribution of such malt beverages or wine or distilled spirits in the unincorporated area of Gordon County. All appropriate and pertinent parts of this article shall be applicable to any applicant for or holder of a wholesale license to sell and/or distribute malt beverages and/or wine and/or distilled spirits under this article. 
(6)  Any manufacturer of alcoholic beverages whose plant is located in the unincorporated area of Gordon County shall pay a license fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(7)  Any applicant for a license under this article for hotel in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall pay an additional license fee in an amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(8)  Any applicant for an off-premises catering license (caterer's license) shall pay an annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(9)  The above-described fees shall not be prorated for applicants whose businesses operate for less than one (1) calendar year. No refund shall be made to license holders whose license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XV; Ord. of 10-2-12, § 1) 
Sec. 7-116. - Expiration; renewal; transfer. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each license year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application together with the requisite fees with the license officer on the form provided for renewal of a license for the ensuing year. 
(1)  Applications for renewal must be filed on or before November 15 of each year, otherwise no license, except for good cause shown, shall be renewed. If a license is not renewed in a timely manner, the application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of a license to the same extent as if no previous license had been held. 
(2)  Certified payment of license fees for renewal shall be made at the time of application, and upon approval of the renewal application by the commission, the license will be issued. Applications for renewal of existing licenses shall be acted upon by the commission at the second regularly scheduled meeting in December following the filing of the renewal application, unless additional time is required by the commission to obtain additional information pertaining to such application. 
(3)  No license may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. 
(4)  If the resident manager in whose name a license is held ceases to be employed in such capacity, the owner, within five (5) days of such event, shall notify the license officer of the fact. The owner shall, within thirty (30) days of such event, submit a new application for the license to the new resident officer, partner, associate, resident managing officer or managing agent. The application shall consist of completed portions of the application for an alcoholic beverage license which pertains to the new applicant along with a copy of the notice of change of interest required by the state revenue commissioners and a certified check in the nonrefundable amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), to defray investigative and administrative costs. In addition, the applicant shall cause to be published a notice of such change as provided in this article. The application shall be considered in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article for new applications. Failure to comply with this section shall result in the lapse of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(5)  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representative or heirs must submit a new application for the license containing the same information as required for a new applicant within thirty (30) days of the death of the license holder. 
(6)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at another location must make a new application and pay all applicable fees. 
(7)  Upon a change in ownership of the licensed business, the new owner shall comply with all provisions of this article prior to commencing business, including the payment of all applicable fees. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XVI) 
Sec. 7-117. - Building and location requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the commission because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or because of the effect such an establishment would have on adjacent and surrounding properties and neighborhoods. 
(b)  No license shall issue for a location within an area where, in the judgment and discretion of the commission, the number of alcoholic licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(c)  No license shall issue for a location at which the operation of such licensed business violates the zoning rules and regulations of Gordon County. 
(d)  No license shall issue for a location where a previous license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the commission, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a licensed business at such a location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such a location. 
(e)  No license shall issue for a location where it would violate state or local law, rules, regulations or ordinances. 
(f)  No license shall issue for a location where the nearest point of the main structure of the business is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest point of any school, public park, public recreation facility or church or the grounds, real estate, or property of any school, public park, public recreation facility or church. The one thousand-foot distance shall be measured in a straight line between the closest point of the structure of the business and the closest point of the property line of the school, public park, public recreation facility or church. The word "school" shall include kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, colleges and other educational institutions, whether public or private. In the event a school or church subsequently locates within one thousand (1,000) feet of a license premises, this provision shall not be applicable under such circumstances, and such an event would not cause a license holder to be in violation of this provision or prohibit the renewal of the license. As used in this section, a school shall mean any instructional premises including, but not limited to, main school buildings auditoriums, gymnasiums, shops laboratories, temporary mobile classrooms, outdoor classrooms, and recreational facilities, such as playgrounds, ball fields, and similarly used areas. A church shall mean any structure of any commonly recognized religion, denomination or sect regularly used for worship or religious instruction. As used in this section, the word "school" or "church" shall also mean the campus or grounds surrounding the school or church which constitute a part of the school or church properties. The word "school" or "church" shall also mean any real property which has been purchased by a school or church at the time of the application for an alcoholic beverage license and said property is to be used for a school or a church. 
(g)  This distance requirement of one thousand (1,000) feet shall not apply to any business holding a valid license pursuant to the requirements of this section in operation at the time of this enactment of this article. 
(h)  No license shall issue for any location in which the licensed premises contains a drive-in window for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(i)  The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the Gordon County Sheriff's Department, the Gordon County Environmental Health Department, and any other authorized personnel of the county at all times. 
(j)  A consumption on the premises license shall be issued only to restaurants, hotels, nonprofit private clubs and veteran's organizations as defined herein. 
(k)  Retail package licenses shall not be issued to restaurants or hotels. However, retail package licenses may be issued to nonprofit private clubs and veteran organizations. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XVI; Ord. of 12-19-17(1)) 
Sec. 7-118. - Display of license at place of business. 
The Gordon County license shall at all times be displayed in plain view at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XVII) 
Sec. 7-119. - Refund. 
No fees paid for an alcoholic beverage license shall be refunded whether partially or in full once the license is issued. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XVIII) 
Sec. 7-120. - Required reports and notices. 
(a)  The licensee must report to the commission, within five (5) days, any changes in any interests in the licensee's business including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any change in the division of ownership in the licensed business; 
(2)  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
(3)  Any change in the ownership of stock or any corporation that has an interest in the licensed business except for the sale of stock over the counter or through a recognized stock exchange. 
(b)  The commission shall notify the licensee within ten (10) days of the receipt of the information required by paragraph (a) above of any objections to the changes reported. Upon receipt of the objections, if any, from the commission, the licensee shall have thirty (30) days to satisfy such objections. Failure to report such changes or to satisfy such objections may result in the suspension or revocation of all licenses held by the licensee. 
(c)  The report reflecting the change in interest shall be on a form provided by the commission and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application which shall remain on file with the commission. The report shall be under oath and verified. 
(d)  Since licenses may be revoked if gross sales of groceries and food products fall below fifty (50) percent of the combined business volume of groceries, food products and alcoholic beverages sold monthly for three (3) consecutive months, a report verifying those sales shall be required of each license holder not exempted by the requirements of this article. On or before the twentieth day of each month, each licensee shall furnish to the license officer an affidavit showing the gross sales of groceries and food products (excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages), and the gross sales of groceries, food products and alcoholic beverages for the preceding month. The license officer shall furnish the form for this affidavit which shall be under oath. The licensee must attach to the affidavit a copy of a state sales and use report for the same period. The reports provided for in this subsection shall be confidential. Copies of summaries of sales and state form ATT-122 shall be furnished to the license officer on a monthly basis by wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to licensees. The report shall apply to deliveries made during the previous month. Copies of these reports shall be submitted with the excise tax described in section 7-121. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XIX) 
Sec. 7-121. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
Each license issued pursuant to this article is granted as a mere privilege and not a right. 
(1)  Grounds for revocation or suspension. The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. The existence of such grounds shall be determined by the commission in their sole discretion, to wit: 
a.  Violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors, or of any resolution or ordinance of the county, other than minor traffic violations; or 
b.  The failure of the licensee or his employee to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law, regulation, resolution, ordinance or breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation occurring on the premises; or 
c.  Any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees contrary to the public welfare, safety, health and morals; or 
d.  Operating or conducting the licenses business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance; or 
e.  The violation by a license holder of any state or federal law or regulation, municipal or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, specifically including any violation of any provision of this article; or 
f.  The violation by the licensee of the state controlled substances act; or 
g.  The violation by the licensee of any federal, state or local law prohibiting the sale of pornographic materials; or 
h.  Failure of the licensee to furnish to the commission an report required by this article or any reasonable reports requested in writing by the commission; or 
i.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked by any jurisdiction for violations of its laws or rules within a period of five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of an application for a license, or the renewal thereof, under this article; or 
j.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as felony involving moral turpitude; or 
k.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any federal, state or local law classified as a felony not involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years from date of filing an application for a license, or the renewal thereof, under this article; or 
l.  Allowing a person to work in the licensed business who has violated the provisions of this article or any law of the United States or any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages within the past five (5) years from the date of filing an application for a license, or the renewal thereof, under this article; or 
m.  Permitting a person to work in the licensed business who has violated any state or federal law or regulation, municipal or county resolution or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, specifically including any provision of this article. 
(2)  Hearings. 
a.  A license holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the commission or their designated hearing officer, concerning any alleged violation which could lead to revocation or suspension of the license. 
b.  Upon the report of any violation of this article, the license officer shall give notice to the license holder in writing to show cause before the commission why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
c.  A written notice from the license officer shall specify the nature of the violation and the time and place for the hearing, which shall not be less than three (3) days nor more than fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the notice. Service shall be deemed completed three (3) business days after mailing to the licensee's address listed on the application. 
d.  The commission shall have the power to suspend any license under this article for a period of time not to exceed seventeen (17) days pending the hearing on the question of whether or not the license shall be further suspended or revoked for cause. 
e.  At the hearing, the licensee shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. 
f.  Hearings shall be conducted consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings which shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. All testimony shall be sworn. The hearing shall be recorded and transcription may be provided at cost to the applicant. 
g.  The commission shall hear all relevant evidence as to the alleged violation of this article. 
h.  The hearing need not be at a regular meeting of the commission, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
i.  Within three (3) days from the date of the hearing, the commission shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the licensee via certified mail. A decision of the commission shall be effective immediately. 
j.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a licensee who has had his license revoked may reapply for a license after thirty (30) days have elapsed from the effective date of the revocation. Such a reapplication shall conform with all procedural requirements applicable to a new application, including all fees. The commission shall consider all matters relevant to the application, including any previous suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XX) 
Sec. 7-122. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesaler selling alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated area of the county an excise tax in the following amounts: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in and from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces; 
(3)  On the first sale or use of wine by the package, a tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(4)  Where distilled spirits are sold for consumption on the premises, a tax upon the sale of such beverages in the amount of three (3) percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. Dealers collecting the tax authorized hereunder shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8. 
(b)  The taxes imposed by this provision shall not be levied with respect to any sales of alcoholic beverages which are exempt from taxation by federal or state law. 
(c)  The taxes imposed by this provision shall be paid by the wholesaler on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XXI) 
Sec. 7-123. - Revenue. 
Revenue produced from this article shall be used only in the unincorporated area of Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XXII) 
Sec. 7-124. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Any forms, not otherwise provided, required by this article shall be printed by Gordon County and furnished to applicants and license holders. 
(b)  A copy of this article shall be furnished to each license holder by Gordon County. 
(c)  The use of the singular tense includes the plural tense and the plural tense includes the singular tense. The use of any gender includes all genders. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XIII) 
Sec. 7-125. - Violations. 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to process of the court having jurisdiction for the offense, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by confinement in the county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. The penalty provided for this in this section shall be in addition to any other penalty provided elsewhere in this article, including the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XIV) 
Sec. 7-126. - Remedies. 
In the event any provision of this article has been violated, or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, Gordon County may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 7-10-12, § XV) 
Secs. 7-127—7-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 3, 2009, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 7-151—7-200, in its entirety, and §§ I, 2—14 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted March 2, 1993, §§ 1—5, 7, 8, 10. 

Sec. 7-151. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other local governments, and on the experiences of both Gordon County, Georgia, and municipalities contained therein, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problem faced by Gordon County, we take note of the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments, whether or [not] alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other local governments which permit adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The Gordon County Board of Commissioners have received reports from county staff based upon the American Planning Association guide entitled "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex Businesses", authored by Eric Damien Kelly and Connie B. Cooper, published in December, 2000. Additionally, the board of commissioners has considered the report from the Chief of Police of the City of Calhoun made to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Calhoun at its meeting of November 24, 2008, wherein he outlined that during his nearly forty (40) years in military and civilian law enforcement he has personally observed the negative secondary effects of the adult entertainment businesses on the community to include increased crime rates, depreciation in property values, and the deterioration of community character and quality of life in or near adult entertainment businesses. The board of commissioners also desires to enact an ordinance compatible with the ordinance adopted by the City of Calhoun to ensure uniformity in regulation and enforcement within Gordon County, Georgia. In addition, the board of commissioners also recognize that courts have made findings in these issues and rely on the collective wisdom and common sense of each member of this governing body. Furthermore, the board of commissioners relies on the evidentiary foundation set forth in those court decisions such as Renton v. Playtime Theater, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), 106 S. Ct. 925, to the effect that negative secondary effects are caused by the presence of even one (1) adult entertainment establishment in a given neighborhood. 
(c)  An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, public indecency, public solicitation, violent crime, prostitution, exploitation of young women, drug use, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other local governments that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly where there are two (2) or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly in such businesses that serve alcohol. The governing authority has a substantial interest in guarding against these undesirable secondary effects, to protect public health, safety and welfare and to preserve and protect the quality of life in the Gordon County. The board of commissioners also wishes to guard against public indecency which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, and to guard against certain sexual contact provided for money, which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-16. 
(d)  The board of commissioners also finds that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions, particularly where there are two (2) or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly in such businesses that serve alcohol. Conditions experienced by other local governments are: depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, neighborhood blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above-mentioned crime problems. The board of commissioners notes a substantial governmental interest in regulating this and any atmosphere conducive to violence, sexual harassment, public intoxication, prostitution, spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other negative effects. Gordon County wishes to protect against neighborhood blight and downgrade of surrounding neighborhoods due to the problems and undesirable behavior associated with adult entertainment establishments. 
(e)  The board of commissioners finds that the above-stated undesirable secondary effects will harm Gordon County unless these regulations are imposed to limit such adverse effects. These regulations are to minimize the adverse effects in order to preserve the quality of life and to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals and to maintain the integrity of this community, especially in residential areas, and areas which have a church, school, day care center, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground. These regulations are to promote these legitimate public and governmental interests in a way that will not infringe upon the constitutional right of freedom of expression. The board of commissioners is not attempting to preclude adult entertainment; rather, the board seeks to regulate adult entertainment establishments to protect the public from the above-described negative secondary effects. The board of commissioners has narrowly tailored these regulations to combat the negative secondary effects and to protect the public health, safety and welfare, while allowing reasonable avenues of protected first amendment communication. The board of commissioners has found no less-restrictive alternative to these regulations that would adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. The restrictions posed by these regulations are no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the government interest stated above. 
(f)  Therefore, the purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments to prevent increases in criminal activity and undesirable community conditions. It is recognized that such regulation cannot approach prohibition, or a protected form of expression would vanish. Therefore, this article represents an attempt to balance the competing interests of reduced criminal activity and neighborhood protection versus the rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § I) 
Sec. 7-152. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be defined in the most recent edition of the Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten (10) square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, flim, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this article, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas". 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten (10) square feet of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly feature live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" shall include, but not be limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a thirty-percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented act or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 2) 
Sec. 7-153. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of Gordon County, Georgia, an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in subsection 7-161(b) when the county, acting through its designated agent, fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within thirty (30) days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issues by the county if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within Gordon County in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the county administrator or his designee within ten (10) days after Gordon County approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All license[s] granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the county administrator or his designee on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall be assessed, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of twenty (20) percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half (½) of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rage then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 3) 
Sec. 7-154. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 4) 
Sec. 7-155. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated area of Gordon County shall make application to the county administrator or his designee. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by Gordon County, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a partner. 
At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid to the county administrator or his designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The designated Gordon County employee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s), and the owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s), and the owners(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s), and the owner(s), if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the date of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the operator(s) at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership or an LLC, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership or LLC filed with the Georgia Secretary of State shall be provided. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner or lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five (5) years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendre), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the Gordon County Sheriff's Department. 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is being made is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and the last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three (3) character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. Gordon County shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s), and the owner(s) who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the county administrator, or his designee, and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. Gordon County shall have thirty (30) days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s). The county administrator, or his designee, shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five (5) business days of actual receipt of such application. The county administrator, or his designee, shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within thirty (30) days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the county administrator, or his designee, finds: 
(1)  The required three hundred dollars ($300.00) investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire; sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five (5) years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by Gordon County or any other county or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five (5) years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth [in subsection 7-156(a) of] this article from any residential use, church, school public park or children's day care facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation of Gordon County, the State of Georgia, or the United States. 
The county administrator, or his designee, shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in Gordon County's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 5) 
Sec. 7-156. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential uses or purposes ("residential area"); 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
(3)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than a I-2; 
(5)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in subsection 7-155(d)(3) of this article within the five (5) years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit of employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer, as defined in subsection 7-156(b)(1), on a licensed premise, he or she shall file a notice with the Gordon County Sheriff's Department of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the Gordon County Sheriff's Department and shall receive a permit for such employment form the Gordon County Sheriff's Department. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the Gordon County Sheriff's Department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of offenses described in subsection 7-155(d)(3) of this article, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the past five (5) years. The Gordon County Sheriff's Department shall approve or deny the permit within fifteen (15) days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection 7-156(b), then upon payment of the permit fee, the Gordon County Sheriff's Department shall issue a permit approving such employment within forty-eight (48) hours. If such permit is not issued within forty-eight (48) hours of such finding, the employee seeking the permit may commence work at the adult entertainment establishment which is the subject of the permit application without such a permit. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the Gordon County Sheriff's Department shall provide the prospective employee the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, appeal to the board of commissioners, which shall uphold or reverse the decision within thirty (30) days of such appeal. The annual permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of permit—Procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in subsection 7-155(d)(3) of this article shall subject the adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the county administrator or his designee finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the county administrator shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefor. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within ten (10) days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners, a fifty-dollar appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Mondays through Saturdays except Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by the article. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3.5) footcandles per square foot. 
(g)  Building. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 6) 
Sec. 7-157. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patron, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 7) 
Sec. 7-158. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 8) 
Sec. 7-159. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Gordon County may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 9) 
Sec. 7-160. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of Gordon County and the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The Gordon County Fire Department, the Gordon County Building Inspection Department and any other applicable county department and employee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health, building and other codes of Gordon County and the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The Gordon County Sheriff's Department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulation and laws. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 10) 
Sec. 7-161. - Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of Gordon County's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments found within the Gordon County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under subsection 7-155(d), above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within thirty (30) days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the county administrator, or his designee, shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the county administrator's, or his designee's, decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than thirty (30) days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than thirty (30) days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The county administrator or his designee shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the county of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than thirty (30) days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the county administrator or his designee shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three (3) business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the county administrator, or his designee, denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five (5) business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Gordon County, its officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this article, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Gordon County or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the board of commissioners finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the county administrator shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within ten (10) days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five (5) business days of the decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the Superior Court of Gordon County or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 11) 
Sec. 7-162. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 12) 
Sec. 7-163. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 13) 
Sec. 7-164. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 11-3-09, § 14) 
Secs. 7-165—7-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 1998, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified herein as Art. VI, §§ 7-201—7-212 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 7-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is balance the interests of the citizens of the county, telecommunications providers, telecommunications customers, and developers of tower and antenna facilities in the siting of telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas within the unincorporated areas of the county so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of the county by (a) providing for the appropriate location and development of tower facilities in such locations which promote public safety and the general welfare and serve the residents and businesses of the county; (b) minimizing, through proper siting, screening, and design, the potential for visual blight and incompatibility and the proliferation of towers and antennas; (c) promoting tower safety through proper engineering and siting; (d) promoting and maximizing the shared use or colocation of new and existing towers; (e) encouraging the use of existing structures for antenna locations as an alternative to the development of additional single-use towers; and (f) accommodating the increased demand for tower facility development. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. I) 
Sec. 7-202. - Definitions. 
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meanings given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section and article in which they occur. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used solely for cable television services. 
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
Guy tower shall mean a tower supported, in whole or in part, by guy wire(s) and ground anchors. 
Height shall mean the vertical distance of any structure measured from the bottom of the base of the structure at ground level to the highest point of such structure. 
Lattice tower shall mean a telecommunications tower having open-framed supports on three (3) or four (4) sides and constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
Monopole towers shall mean a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Preexisting towers and antennas shall mean any conforming tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. The owner of a nonconforming, preexisting tower or antenna shall submit the annual certification to the building inspector as required under this article. 
Telecommunications facilities shall refer to antennas and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower shall mean a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment (alternative tower structure), on which is located one (1) or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
Tower sites shall mean an area within the county where the construction, erection and maintenance of a tower is permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. II) 
Cross reference— General rules of construction; definitions, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-203. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service. 
(3)  Any telecommunications facility located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Calhoun, Georgia, or Gordon County, Georgia, provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the respective governing body. 
(4)  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. III) 
Sec. 7-204. - Placement of towers. 
(a)  Any person, company, organization or entity desiring to obtain a permit to construct and erect a tower within the unincorporated areas of the county shall file a written application with the county department of building, planning and development and pay an application fee in the amount of: 
(1)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the property for which the permit to construct and erect a tower is publicly owned; or 
(2)  Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) if the property for which the permit to construct and erect a tower is privately owned. 
(b)  An application will not be considered until it is complete. The county department of building, planning and development is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and to facilitate the application process. In addition to those requirements contained elsewhere in this article, the application shall be in compliance with the county zoning ordinance and any other applicable local ordinance and state or federal law. 
(c)  The following information shall be submitted when applying for any permit required by this article and must be submitted for any application to be considered complete: 
The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to approve or deny the permit request: 
(1)  Height of proposed tower or antenna; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures, schools, daycare centers, nursery schools, recreation areas, playgrounds, parks, hospitals and churches; 
(3)  Nature of uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
(5)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing visual obtrusiveness; 
(6)  Proximity to other antennas or towers; 
(7)  Availability of suitable existing antennas or towers or other structures. 
(d)  In approving the permit, the county may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. Should the permit be denied, the decision shall be in writing, supported by substantial evidence as contained in a written record of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. IV) 
Sec. 7-205. - General requirements. 
The location and construction of towers governed by this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Construction/inspections. 
a.  Towers shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with applicable building codes, industry standards, and standards for towers published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Towers shall be structurally designed and constructed to allow for a minimum of three (3) shared uses. Tower owners shall be responsible for periodic written inspections of such towers at least every twelve (12) months to ensure structural integrity. Such inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer with a current license issued by the State of Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be submitted to the county office of building, planning and development and shall be maintained by the tower owner(s) and available for public review upon request. 
b.  If, upon inspection, the office of building, planning and development concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and poses a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice thereof to the owner, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance. Should the owner fail to bring the tower into compliance within thirty (30) days, the county may remove such tower at the owner's expense pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-12. 
c.  Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no tower permit shall be issued for a tower with less than three (3) shared uses without a variance granted by the county board of appeals. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. Tower owners shall annually certify in writing to the office of building, planning and development in January of each year that each tower is in compliance with standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner(s) of the towers governed by this article shall bring such towers or antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. 
(3)  Security. All towers, except alternative tower structures, shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device. 
(4)  Advertising. Except for the owner's identifying name plate, advertising on towers shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Tower lighting. Illumination is prohibited on towers, except where required by the FCC or FAA, as necessary for air traffic safety. When illumination is required, documentation shall be provided with the application identifying the type of illumination required and any available alternatives. The county may review alternative permissible illumination and may approve the design causing the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(6)  Access. Access for maintenance vehicles shall be the right-of-way which would most minimize interference with public traffic. Proposed sites which lack frontage on a public or private road shall provide an easement at least twenty (20) feet wide with at least twelve (12) feet graveled or paved travel way. 
(7)  Hazardous/volatile substances. Use of a lot by a tower shall be prohibited when another principal use, on the same lot, includes storage, distribution, or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas, dangerous chemicals, or hazardous waste when such materials are not part of an emergency power source for the tower facilities. 
(8)  Maintenance/operation structures. Maintenance/operation structures adjacent to any tower facility area shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies directly in support of the tower. Such structures shall not be used for offices, vehicle storage or for any continuous human occupation. Any equipment not used in direct support of a tower site shall not be stored on the site. 
(9)  Historic sites. Tower facilities shall not be attached to or mounted to historically significant buildings, structures, or places identified by placement upon the national register of historic places, by designation as a state historical site, by designation by the county historical society as a historic site, or as part of a locally designated historic district. 
(10)  Setbacks and separations. All towers shall comply with the following standards, except that existing alternative tower structures are exempt from the minimum setback and separation requirements of this section; provided however, that such alternative tower structure must be a conforming use within the zoning district in which it is located for this setback exemption to apply as a matter of right. 
a.  All towers and antennas shall set back at least a distance equal to the height of the tower plus fifteen (15) feet, from any dwelling, zoning district line, or public property. 
b.  All towers and maintenance/operation structures (including guy wires) shall comply with the setbacks as required by the zoning district in which the tower is to be located. 
c.  The height limitations applicable to buildings in the zoning districts in which the tower or alternative tower structure is located shall not apply to such facilities or structures as a result of the tower or antenna. 
(11)  Buffers and screening. 
a.  Tower sites shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials such that the view of the base of the tower is screened from any public rights-of-way, public property, and any other privately owned property. 
b.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, this landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether by the building inspector upon specific findings by the building inspector. 
c.  Existing mature growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited upon large, wooded lots, natural growth around the perimeter of the property may be a sufficient buffer if so determined by the building inspector upon specific findings by the building inspector. 
d.  In buffer construction, native vegetation shall be preserved to the fullest extent possible. 
(12)  Visual impact. 
a.  Towers shall maintain a galvanized matte steel finish or be painted a natural, earth-toned color, unless otherwise required by the FAA. 
b.  The design of buildings and accessory structures at tower base of facility sites shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping which create the greatest level of compatibility with the natural environment and existing land use patterns. 
c.  Antennas installed on an alternative tower structure and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a natural color that is similar to or compliments the color of the alternative tower structure. 
d.  Tower antennas shall be designed to be visually compatible with the exterior of the alternative tower structure to which they are to be attached. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. V) 
Sec. 7-206. - Shared use/colocation. 
New tower sites shall not be permitted if there is an existing technically and commercially reasonable space available for shared use/colocation on preexisting towers and antennas or existing conforming towers and antennas. 
(1)  The application for a permit to develop a tower shall demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of any or all of the following: 
a.  Certification that no existing tower or alternative tower structures are located within the geographic area necessary to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Certification that existing tower or alternative tower structures have insufficient height and cannot be modified to accommodate the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Certification that existing tower or alternative tower structures do not have sufficient integrity or strength and cannot be modified to support the proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  Certification that the proposed antenna would cause interference with the antenna on the existing tower or alternative tower structure, or the antenna on the existing tower or alternative tower structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  Certification that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or alternative tower structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative tower structure for sharing unreasonably exceed market costs. 
f.  Certification that property owners of existing towers are unwilling to reasonably accommodate the applicant's needs. 
g.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other objective limitations which render existing towers unsuitable. 
(2)  Permit applicants for towers shall certify and demonstrate that they will allow the shared use of such facilities with other tower apparatus which does not interfere with the primary purpose of the tower or such applicant shall document that the reserved space on the tower is to fulfill the owner's future needs. All applicants shall identify how the applicant will make available such shared use/colocation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. VI) 
Sec. 7-207. - Additional application requirements. 
In addition to the application submitted pursuant to the requirements of this article, the applicant shall attach thereto the following: 
(1)  Inventory of existing towers. An inventory of the applicant's existing towers which are within the county, including all municipal corporations located therein and including areas within one-half mile of the border thereof, including the specific locations, heights, and designs of each such tower. 
(2)  A description of the proposed tower's area of service. 
(3)  Photo simulations or renderings of the proposed tower illustrating the potential visual impact. For towers exempt from further review, this requirement shall be satisfied by photos or drawings of similar towers. 
(4)  A site plan or plans to scale specifying the proposed location and dimensions of tower(s), size of maintenance/operation buildings or uses, access, parking, fences, landscape plans, existing and adjacent land uses. 
(5)  A site plan for alternative tower structures shall show adjacent rights-of-way, buildings, and structures, including the structure's height and dimensions, proposed antenna location on the structure or building and adjacent land uses. 
(6)  A report from a professional engineer, currently licensed in Georgia, documenting the following: 
a.  Tower heights and design, including technical engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing the proposed tower design. 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure. 
d.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that the site, setbacks, and separation from other uses are of adequate size or distance to protect the safety of the general public and all of the nearby landowners. 
(7)  A written statement from the owner of the tower certifying that the proposed tower site complies with regulations administered by the FAA and FCC, or stating that the tower is exempted from these regulations. In addition, the applicant shall provide written verification from the FAA that the proposed tower and/or tower site complies with its regulations. 
(8)  Evidence of compliance with colocation requirements set forth in this article. 
(9)  Any additional information which may be reasonably requested by the building inspector and/or any other agent or employee of the county, in order to evaluate fully and to review the proposed tower site and the potential impact of a proposed tower and/or antenna. 
(10)  On any tower located on private property, a bond, letter of credit, cash equivalent, or other instrument provided by the applicant and approved by the county in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the construction cost of the telecommunications facility, whichever amount is greater, that insures funds will be available to the county for removal of an abandoned telecommunications facility. This performance guarantee is in addition to any other remedies available to the county in the event a telecommunications facility is abandoned. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. VII) 
Sec. 7-208. - Nuisances/abandoned towers. 
(a)  Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the county notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the county may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. 
The county may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the county in taking action shall not in any way waive the county's right to take action. The county may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(c)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner must first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. VIII) 
Sec. 7-209. - Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with the county zoning ordinance. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. IX) 
Sec. 7-210. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the county and shall be punished by either a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed twelve (12) months or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article, the county, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. 
(c)  Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. X) 
Sec. 7-211. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the county finds that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this article may be granted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. XI) 
Sec. 7-212. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the building inspector shall be to the county board of appeals in accordance with the procedures for an appeal as set out in the county zoning ordinance. 
Recourse from a decision of the board of appeals shall be to the board of commissioners in accordance with the same procedures as set out in the county zoning ordinance for an appeal to the board of appeals. Recourse from a decision of the board of commissioners shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction by the filing of an appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98, Art. XII) 
Secs. 7-213—7-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GORDON COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY PROTECTION 

Sec. 7-221. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Gordon County Right-of-Way Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § I) 
Sec. 7-222. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide procedures, rules and regulations governing persons, firms, businesses, companies, municipalities, utilities and corporations engaged in any activity involving the utilization of county road rights-of-way in Gordon County and to provide for the issuance of permits to protect the citizens, the environment, county infrastructure, and to assure the public's safety. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § II) 
Sec. 7-223. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Activity means any endeavor, whether or not for profit, that takes place over, on or within the public rights-of-way of Gordon County. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County or their successors in office being the governing authority of Gordon County. 
County means Gordon County, Georgia. 
E.I.N. means employee identification number or that identifier used when filing or completing tax forms for the Internal Revenue Service or the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
Person means and shall include individuals, firms, businesses, public or private profit or nonprofit corporations, companies, partnerships, municipalities, or utilities. 
Right-of-way means that public property traversed by county roads, the title of which is secured by deed or by prescription. 
SSN means social security number. 
Surety bond means one (1) of the following: cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit or a bond issued by a licensed surety authorized to do business in the State of Georgia in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
Timber means softwood or hardwood trees. Also, for purposes of this article, "timber" means softwood or hardwood logs, pulpwood, chip-n-saw, saw timber, poles, posts, or fuelwood for which the Georgia Department of Revenue requires the filing of form PT-283T. 
Timber operations means buying, cutting, harvesting and/or hauling timber in Gordon County. 
Timber operator means any person, firm or corporation engaged in buying, harvesting or hauling timber in Gordon County for commercial or profit making purposes. 
Utility means and includes those persons engaged in the transmission or provision of electricity, water, natural gas, cable television, telephone service, or sewerage service. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § III) 
Sec. 7-224. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-225. - Permits. 
(a)  [Required; exception.] 
(1)  No person shall engage in any activity upon, across, or through the rights-of-way of roads in Gordon County without first securing a permit to conduct such operations in Gordon County, with the exception of the placement of mailboxes for the delivery of items from the U.S. Postal Service. Said mailboxes shall be constructed or designed in such a way that the design allows for the unit to break away upon impact. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mailbox to maintain and repair those portions of the public rights-of-way impacted or damaged through the delivery of mail by vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Any person seeking a permit shall apply in person or through an authorized agent at the Gordon County Road Department and shall provide the following information for each permit requested in subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  Timber operations. 
(1)  No timber operation shall commence in Gordon County, whether or not over, upon, across, or through county rights-of-way, without first having obtained Georgia Department of Revenue form PT 283T, completing sections A, B, C, and G of said form, and submitting "Sellers Copy for Tax Assessor" to the Gordon County Road Department as an accompaniment to the permit application. 
(2)  Timber operations that do not access or utilize county roads or rights-of-way shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (b)(10) of this section only. All other provisions of this article shall be applicable. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the property on which the timber operator will engage in timber operations. 
(4)  The location of the property on which the timber operator will engage in timber operations. 
(5)  The roads in Gordon County upon which timber trucks will travel. 
(6)  The date cutting operations are expected to commence and end. 
(7)  The name and address of all persons in a supervisory capacity engaged in the timber operation at the location for which the permit is requested. 
(8)  If the timber operator intends to engage independent contractors to haul the timber, then the name, address SSN or E.I.N. of each independent contractor. 
(9)  If the timber operator is engaged in hauling only, then the name, address SSN or E.I.N. of the timber operator for whom he will be hauling. 
(10)  A surety bond made payable to Gordon County indemnifying the county for any damage caused by the timber operator from its timber operations in Gordon County. 
(11)  In addition to the provisions of this article, the applicant for a permit will comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to timber operations. 
(12)  Timber operations occurring on two (2) acres or less and being done primarily for the purpose of building construction or lot maintenance may be exempted from the requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (10) upon the inspection and approval of the road superintendent. 
(c)  Utility providers. 
(1)  The location of the property on which the utility provider will engage in operations. 
(2)  The date utility operations are expected to commence and end. 
(3)  The name and address of all persons in a supervisory capacity engaged in the utility operation at the location for which the permit is requested. 
(4)  If the utility provider intends to engage independent contractors, then the name, SSN or E.I.N. of each independent contractor. 
(5)  A surety bond made payable to Gordon County indemnifying the county for any damage caused by the utility provider from its operations in Gordon County. 
(6)  In addition to the provisions of this article, the applicant for a permit will comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to utility operations. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § V) 
Sec. 7-226. - Issuance of permit. 
A permit will be issued to the applicant without charge when all required information and surety bond as required for the issuance of the permit has been provided. 
Permits will not be issued for signage, advertisements, or notices of any kind upon the rights-of-way of county roads, and the unauthorized placement of such shall be unlawful. Any unauthorized items placed upon the rights-of-way in Gordon County shall be considered littering and Gordon County, its officers and employees shall be empowered to remove and destroy such items. 
All permits shall be conspicuously posted, clearly visible, and located upon the public right-of-way abutting the property upon which the permitted activity is taking place. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § VI) 
Sec. 7-227. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall allow dirt, mud, gravel or other debris from adjoining land or resulting from any activity to accumulate upon the rights-of-way of any public road to such an extent that it becomes a nuisance or a hazard to persons traveling upon said roads, or that it creates an unsightly condition upon the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  No person shall allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from any activity to accumulate in ditches and drainage areas on public rights-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water or run-off is stopped, disturbed, changed or interrupted. 
(c)  No person shall create any other type of public nuisance that interferes with or in anyway damages the public rights-of-way in Gordon County. 
(d)  No person shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon the rights-of-way of any county road. 
(e)  No activity, whether permitted by this article or any other article, shall commence operation or continue to operate without first installing and maintaining, when necessary, a temporary drive cut and culvert to access property and installing and maintaining soil erosion and sedimentation controls sufficient to prevent dirt, mud, gravel or other debris from accumulating in the county drainage ditches or on county roads. 
(f)  No timber operator shall commence timber operations until he has first posted or caused to be posted along the public road onto which the timber operator will enter from his timber operations, at least the following signs: one (1) sign in each direction located five hundred (500) feet from the entrance which states "Slow trucks entering highway", one (1) sign in each direction located one thousand (1,000) feet from the entrance stating "Warning: Logging operation ahead." Each such sign shall be not less than 36"×36", orange in color and posted at least three (3) feet from the edge of the surface of said road. 
(g)  No permitted activity shall continue in operation if the permittee fails to keep county roads free from dirt, mud, gravel or other debris resulting from the activity being performed. 
(h)  Immediately upon the completion of the permitted activity, an inspection shall take place by the road superintendent to insure that all county rights-of-way have been restored to its original condition. Failure to insure restoration shall result in the forfeiture of the surety bond. 
(i)  In addition to any other penalty provided for under the provisions of this article, or under the provisions of any state or federal law, any person in violation of this section shall reimburse the county for any and all costs and expenses incurred in abating said nuisance. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § VII) 
Sec. 7-228. - Violations. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with this article as adopted, or as hereafter amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court of Gordon County and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § VIII) 
Sec. 7-229. - Remedies. 
In the event any provision of this article has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the county may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 5-4-99, § IX) 
Secs. 7-230—7-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 7-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby the person has charge of the business or operations of the pawnshop. Pawnbroker includes any person whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop means any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.1) 
Sec. 7-252. - Enforcement. 
The Gordon County Sheriff's Department shall see that the provisions of this article are observed and enforced. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.2) 
Sec. 7-253. - Annual registration. 
Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first register with the Gordon County Sheriff's Department and provide the following information: 
(1)  The person shall state the address of the pawnshop; and 
(2)  The person shall provide the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security Number of any employee or pawnbroker. 
The registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.3) 
Sec. 7-254. - Record of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the sheriff's department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of property; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale; 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms or sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card that contains a photograph of the customer; 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.); 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn; 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and of the item pawned or bought which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs in the automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. 
(c)  In the even that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnbrokers and pawnshops will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this Code section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly-authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business days or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The Gordon County Sheriff or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnshop brokers and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third-party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.4) 
Sec. 7-255. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods shall hold said goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven (7) calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.5) 
Sec. 7-256. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.6) 
Sec. 7-257. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker to report to the sheriff or his duly-authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have reason to believe that the article or goods were lost or stolen when presented by the seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware of such items have had the identification removed such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.7) 
Sec. 7-258. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article; or 
(2)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this article or any provision thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the appropriate punishment. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § A.9) 
Chapter 8 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; roads and highways, Ch. 12; signs, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 16; possession of open alcoholic beverage container in motor vehicle, § 3-27. 
State Law reference— County traffic regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. Tit. 40; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; general powers of local authorities as to traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq.; local speed limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(10). 

Sec. 8-26. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Generally. The speed limits on streets and highways within the county shall be as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and as published by the board. 
(b)  Speed zones. The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
ON SYSTEM 
(1)  State Route 3 (U.S. 41) (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (Bartow County line) to mile point 3.43 (0.01 mile north of C.R. 94, Salem Road, south city limit of Calhoun), a distance of 3.43 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 10.55 (0.11 mile north of C.R. 186 David Lake Road, north city limit of Calhoun) to mile point 12.37 (0.01 north of C.R. 193, Upper Tate Bend Road, south city limit of Resaca), a distance of 1.82 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 13.87 (0.42 mile north of C.S. 457, Defoor Drive, north city limit of Resaca) to mile point 14.00, (0.55 mile north of C.S. 457 Defoor Drive), a distance of 0.13 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 14.00 (0.55 mile north of C.S. 457, Defoor Drive) to mile point 15.67 (Whitfield County line), a distance of 1.67 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(2)  State Route 53 (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (Floyd County line) to mile point 0.80 (0.36 mile north [of] C.R. 117, Old Calhoun Road), a distance of 0.80 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 0.80 (0.36 mile north [of] C.R. 117, Old Calhoun Road) to mile point 1.45 (0.26 mile north of C.R. 118, Brownlee Mountain Road), a distance of 0.65 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 1.45 (0.26 mile north of C.R. 118, Brownlee Mountain Road) to mile point 7.00 (0.02 mile south of C.S. 780, Stewart Drive), a distance of 5.55 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 7.00 (0.02 mile south of C.S. 780, Stewart Drive) to mile point 7.78 (0.13 mile north of C.S. 858, River Street, west city limit of Calhoun), a distance of 0.78 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 10.02 (0.03 mile north of C.R. 474, Outlet Center Drive, east city limit of Calhoun) to mile point 10.30 (0.31 mile west of C.R. 354, Blackwood Place), a distance of 0.28 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 10.30 (0.31 mile west of C.R. 354, Blackwood Place) to mile point 15.81 (0.15 mile north of C.R. 83, Shope Lake Road), a distance of 5.50 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 15.81 (0.15 mile west of C.R. 83 Shope Lake Road) to mile point 17.40 (0.14 mile west of Pine Log Creek) a distance of 1.60 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 17.40 (0.14 mile west of Pine Log Creek) to mile point 23.06 (0.36 mile east of Salacoa Creek, west city limit of Fairmount), a distance of 5.66 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 24.60 (0.22 mile east of C.R. 430, Saddle Club Drive, east city limit of Fairmount) to mile point 27.27 (Pickens County line, a distance of 2.67 miles), the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(3)  School Zone W.L. Swain School: 
From mile point 3.30 (C.R. 200, Webber Road) to mile point 3.66 (0.13 mile north of C.R. 109 Miller Ferry Road), a distance of 0.36 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(4)  School Zone East Sonoraville School: 
From mile point 15.24 (0.10 mile east of C.R. 76, Erwin Hill Road) to mile point 15.77 (0.22 mile north of C.R. 81, Hardy Road), a distance of 0.53 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(5)  State Road 53 Spur (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (0.01 mile west of C.R. 119, Harris Beamer Road, west city limit of Calhoun) to mile point 1.54, a distance of 1.54 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(6)  State Route 61 U.S. 411: 
From mile point 0.00 (Bartow County line) to mile point 1.02 (C.R. 268, Tennessee Street, south city limit of Fairmount), a distance of 1.02 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 3.04 (C.R. 411, Scott Brown Road, north city limit of Fairmount) to mile point 5.86 (0.14 mile north of C.R. 273, Pitman Road, south city limit of Ranger), a distance of 2.82 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 6.82, (0.51 mile north of C.R. 236, Liberty Church Road, north city limit of Ranger) to mile point 13.15 (Murray County line), a distance of 6.33 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(7)  State Route 136 (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (Walker County line) to mile point 7.31 (0.0l mile south of Camp Creek Bridge, west city limit of Resaca), a distance of 7.31 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 8.83 (0.03 mile east of C.S. 463, Rosemont Drive, east city limit of Resaca) to mile point 13.53 (0.13 mile west of S.R. 225) a distance of 4.70 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 13.53 (0.13 mile west of S.R. 225) to mile point 13.78 (0.25 feet east of S.R. 225), a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 13.78 (0.12 mile east of S.R. 225) to mile point 23.61 (Murray County line), a distance of 9.83 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(8)  State Route 136 Connector (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (S.R. 136) to mile point 3.34 (0.43 mile north of C.R. 482, Harbor Road), a distance of 3.34 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 3.34 (0.43 mile north of C.R. 482, Harbor Road) to mile point 3.59 (0.33 mile north of C.S. 527, Main Street), a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 3.59 (0.33 mile north of C.S. 527, Main Street) to mile point 3.78 (0.14 mile north of C.S. 527, Main Street, north city limit of Sugar Valley), a distance of 0.19 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
From mile point 4.36 (0.12 mile north of C.S. 526, Guyton Road, south city limit of Sugar Valley) to mile point 4.61 (0.37 mile north of C.S. 526, Guyton Road), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 4.61 (0.37 mile north of C.S. 526, Guyton Road) to mile point 7.60 (0.06 mile north of C.S. 838, Woodridge Drive), a distance of 2.99 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(9)  State Route 156 (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (Floyd County line) to mile point 9.79 (Oothcalooga Creek, west city limit of Calhoun), a distance of 9.79 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 13.46 (0.02 mile west of C.R. 474, Harmony Church Road, east city limit of Calhoun) to mile point 14.08 (0.08 mile east of C.R. 24, Newtown Loop), a distance of 0.62 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 14.08 (0.08 mile east of C.R. 24, Newtown Loop) to mile point 17.90 (0.19 mile east of C.R. 39, Hunt Gin Road) a distance of 3.82 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 17.90 (0.19 mile east of C.R. 39, Hunt Gin Road) to mile point 19.80 (0.09 mile east of C.R. 230, Chastain Drive), a distance of 1.90 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 19.80 (0.09 mile east of C.R. 230, Chastain Drive) to mile point 27.33 (S.R. 61/U.S. 411) a distance of 7.53 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(10)  School Zone Red Bud School: 
From mile point 17.96 (0.10 mile east of C.R. 39, Hunt Gin Road) to mile point 18.26 (0.40 mile east of C.R. 39, Hunt Gin Road) a distance of 0.30 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(11)  State Route 225 (No Name): 
From mile point 0.00 (S.R. 3/U.S. 41) to mile point 1.47 (0.06 mile south of C.R. 322, Langston Drive) a distance of 1.47 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 1.47 (0.06 mile south of C.R. 322, Langston Drive) to mile point 7.22 (0.10 mile south of C.R. 475, Pine Chapel Road), a distance of 5.75 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
From mile point 7.22 (0.10 mile south of C.R. 475, Pine Chapel Road) to mile point 7.90 (0.43 mile south of C.R. 134, County Line Road) a distance of 0.68 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
From mile point 7.90 (0.43 mile south of C.R. 134 County Line Road) to mile point 8.36 (Murray County line) a distance of 0.46 mile, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(12)  State Route 401 I-75: 
From mile point 0.00 (Bartow County line) to mile point 15.54 (Whitfield County line), a distance of 15.54 miles, the speed limit shall be 70 miles per hour. 
SIGNS TO BE ERECTED BY THE GEORGIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
*** SCHOOL ZONE HOURS EFFECTIVE***  A.M. from 30 minutes prior to the earliest commencement times to 30 minutes after the latest commencement time 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY  P.M. from 30 minutes prior to the earliest dismissal times to 30 minutes after the latest dismissal time 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
OFF-SYSTEM 
Bellwood Road (C.R. 68). From C.R. 65 Union Grove Road to C.R. Outlet Center Drive a distance of 1.78 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
School Zone Bellwood Elementary School. From 0.18 mile north of C.R. 357 Belwood Drive to 0.20 mile south of C.R. 474 Outlet Center Drive a distance of 0.81 miles, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
Bone Ford Road (C.R. 61). From C.R. 474 Lovers Lane Road to C.R. 373 Cash Road a distance of 5.79 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Cash Road (C.R. 373). From State Route 53 to C.R. 373 Dews Pond Road a distance of 3.03 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Cash Road (C.R. 481). From C.R. 373 Dews Pond Road to State Route 156 a distance of 3.13 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Craigtown Road (C.R. 483). From State Route 225 to State Route 3/U.S. 41 a distance of 1.68 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Dews Pond Road (C.R. 373). From 0.03 mile west of C.S. 817 Curtis Parkway to 0.04 mile east of C.R. 511 Cardinal Road a distance of 6.10 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Dews Pond Road (C.R. 373). From 0.04 mile east of C.R. 511 Cardinal Road to C.R. 373 Cash Road a distance of 0.26 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Hall Memorial Road (C.R. 139). From State Route 136 Connector to C.R. 473 Fairview Road a distance of 1.64 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
School Zone Tolbert Elementary School. From 0.15 mile north of C.R. 142 Goat Road to C.R. 507 Hall Road a distance of 0.31 miles, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
McDaniel Station Road (C.R. 100/5). From C.R. 104 Shaw Road to C.R. 5 Darby Road a distance of 2.82 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
McDaniel Station Road (C.R. 100/5). From C.R. 5 Darby Road to State Route 53 a distance of 1.63 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Newtown Church Road (C.R. 483). From State Route 156 to State Route 225 a distance of 2.42 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Newtown Road (C.R. 21). From State Route 156 to Dead End a distance of 2.22 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Old Dalton Road (C.R. 482). From State Route 156 to C.R. 472 Pocket Road a distance of 5.13 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
Outlet Center Drive (C.R. 474). From C.R. 68 Bellwood Road to State Route 53 a distance of 0.21 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Plainville Road (C.R. 479). From 0.07 mile west of C.R. 114 Franklin to State Route 53 a distance of 1.05 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Pleasant Hill Road (C.R. 252). From State Route 156 to State Route 136 a distance of 5.23 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
***SCHOOL ZONE*** 
School Zone Speed Limit on all "off-system" roads shall be 30 miles per hour from 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement A.M. and from 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal P.M. on SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
(Ord. of 2-11-97; Ord. No. 1-02-02, 8-2-02; No. 06-03-03, 7-1-03) 
Sec. 8-27. - Use of speed detection devices. 
The board of commissioners approves the use of speed detection devices by the county sheriff's department. 
(Res. of 4-3-79(2)) 
State Law reference— Use of radar speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Chapter 9 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Constitution reference— Home rule powers, Art. IX, § II, Par. I. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. Tit. 16; destruction or damaging of any county building or its appurtenances or furniture, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-11; nuisances, O.C.G.A. Tit. 41; power of counties to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, health hazards on private property, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the unincorporated area of the county shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money for another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, to attempt to do so. 
(9)  Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(b)  Any person or persons failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of this section or doing any act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of an offense of disorderly conduct and, upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-5-91, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 9-2. - Enforcement. 
The county ordinance officer shall be authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this article in the unincorporated areas of the county, and on or in county-owned or operated facilities or property, in accordance with all applicable laws of the state. 
(Mo. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 9-3. - Recovery for costs associated with fire and hazardous material emergencies. 
(a)  Gordon County, by and through the Gordon County Fire Department and/or the Gordon County Emergency Management Services Department, may seek recovery for all costs incurred in connection with the delivery of services, personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle accidents and hazardous material emergencies, which costs shall be the actual costs incurred in accordance with a fee schedule properly approved by the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County. Such costs may include emergency rescue tools, equipment and materials; hazardous material abatement tools, equipment and materials; and personnel hours involving hazardous material, environmental, fire safety and/or rescue incident or operation including, but not limited to, vehicular accidents and collisions and any type of hazardous material emergencies. 
(b)  Said cost recovery shall be authorized solely against the insurance carriers providing liability coverage, property damage coverage, vehicle, commercial or homeowner's coverage, or other applicable policies of insurance. The cost recovery efforts shall be filed to the appropriate insurance carrier or coverage of the owner of the property, or the responsible party, whichever is applicable. 
(c)  All monies collected as a result of this section shall be placed into a fund as established by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners to be used exclusively for personnel, supplies and equipment for the Gordon County Fire Department. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08, §§ 1, 5) 
Sec. 9-4. - Recovery for costs associated with damage to fire hydrants. 
(a)  Gordon County, by and through the Gordon County Fire Department and/or the Gordon County Emergency Management Services Department, may seek recovery for all costs incurred in connection with the damage to any Gordon County owned fire hydrant which is damaged by an individual or a business entity. The rate of the cost incurred shall be the actual cost incurred for the repair/replacement of the damaged fire hydrant, and shall include any services, personnel, supplies and equipment necessary for said repair/replacement operation. The rate of the costs may fluctuate based on the needs of the incident. The claim costs shall be filed to the appropriate insurance carrier or coverage of the owner of the property, or the responsible party, whichever is applicable. 
(c)  All monies collected as a result of this section shall be placed into a fund as established by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners to be used exclusively for personnel, supplies and equipment for the Gordon County Fire Department. 
(Ord. of 2-5-08, §§ 2, 5) 
Sec. 9-5. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Restriction of outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Gordon County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in section. 
(2)  The Gordon County Code Enforcement Officer shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county administrator or his designee may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-21-10, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, § 1 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 21, 2010, has been codified as herein set out in § 9-5. Said provisions did not expressly amend the Code. 
Sec. 9-6. - Tampering with water system. 
(a)  No person shall, without a fire hydrant permit or written authority issued by the City of Calhoun Water Department, turn on, damage or otherwise tamper with any part of the water system owned and operated by the City of Calhoun in the unincorporated areas of Gordon County, Georgia, to include, but not limited to, fire hydrants and all related apparatus. This section shall not prohibit any person from turning off water service at the meter temporarily and turning it on later for the purpose of protecting plumbing or for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to any plumbing system. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the prohibited acts set forth in paragraph (a) of this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefits of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both, and be required to pay restitution to the City of Calhoun for all damages and the value of the water taken as determined by the presiding judge. With respect to violations of this section, each day the violation occurs is a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-16-04, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 9-7—9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— County ordinance officer, § 2-4; zoning, Ch. 18. 

Sec. 9-26. - Findings. 
It is found and declared that in the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this county; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88) 
Sec. 9-27. - Adoption of state law; designation of public nuisance officer. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 through 41-2-16 of that title known as "Nuisances" are hereby adopted as the public nuisance ordinance of the county. The O.C.G.A. sections shall be a part of this article as fully as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(b)  The board designee shall serve as the county public nuisance officer as contemplated by the above-referenced O.C.G.A. sections. Such public nuisance officer shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 9-28. - Complaints; investigation; notice of hearing. 
Whenever a request is filed with the public nuisance officer (hereinafter referred to as "the officer") by a public authority, or by at least five (5) residents of the unincorporated area of the county, charging that any dwelling, building or structure in such area is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or whenever it appears to the officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the county, fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the officer. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 1) 
Sec. 9-29. - Determination after hearing; issuance of order. 
If after notice and hearing pursuant to this article the officer determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 2) 
Sec. 9-30. - Basis for requiring removal, demolition of nuisance structure. 
In no event shall the board of commissioners require the removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 3) 
Sec. 9-31. - Failure of owner to comply with order; duties of officer, placarding of structure. 
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order issued under this article to vacate and close or demolish the nuisance dwelling, building or structure, the officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 4) 
Sec. 9-32. - Ordinance authorizing abatement action. 
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the officer set forth in sections 9-31 and 9-32 and in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(4) and (5) shall not be exercised until the board of commissioners has by ordinance ordered the officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 with respect to the particular property or properties which the officer has found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 5) 
Sec. 9-33. - Creation of lien; sale of property, use of funds. 
The amount of the cost of vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the officer pursuant to this article shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the officer in the office of the clerk of the superior court for the county and in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners on a lien docket maintained by the clerks for such purposes. If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the officer he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 6) 
Sec. 9-34. - Enforcement of collection of amount due. 
The board of commissioners may enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county, within thirty (30) days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum, in three (3) equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) above, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by Article 3 (§ 48-4-40 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of O.C.G.A. Tit. 48. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 7) 
Sec. 9-35. - Physical conditions constituting nuisance. 
The officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 8) 
Sec. 9-36. - Use of structure in connection with drug crimes deemed nuisance. 
The officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
Sec. 9-37. - Powers of officer. 
The officer shall have all powers of investigation, examination, appointment and delegation, etc., as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
(Ord. of 10-18-88, § 9) 
Sec. 9-38. - Enforcement. 
The county ordinance officer shall be authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this article in the unincorporated areas of the county, and on or in county-owned or operated facilities or property, in accordance with all applicable laws of the state. 
(Mo. of 4-16-96) 
Secs. 9-39—9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK, SCRAP AND SALVAGE YARDS 

Sec. 9-71. - Regulations established. 
It is the intention of the board of commissioners in enacting this article to provide regulations for the establishment and operation of junk, scrap and salvage yards in the unincorporated area of the county; to provide for the uniform maintenance throughout the county of such facilities, and to thereby curb the desecration of the beauty of the county which is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens. 
This article shall govern the establishment and operation of all junk, scrap and salvage yards within the county. As of July 1, 1991, only operations of those facilities which have obtained a permit as provided herein shall be permitted to operate a junk, scrap and salvage yard within the county. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § I) 
Sec. 9-72. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish and maintain adequate standards of performance, location, site development and appearance of establishments ordinarily found to have objectionable operating characteristics and thereby to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § II) 
Sec. 9-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall be defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile wrecking or automobile parts or automobile salvage yard, business or establishment includes any building, establishment, premises or other area where the business is carried on of stripping old or used automobiles or late model wrecks, or other motor vehicles which have been legally equipped for that purpose, and adding or employment of the accessories and parts thereof in equipping, repairing or rebuilding motor vehicles, or storing, selling or otherwise disposing of such accessories or parts; provided further, such yard, business or establishment is a commercial enterprise wherein late model automobiles which have been wrecked or abandoned and legally acquired by the operator of such yard, business or establishment, or his lawful agent, are stripped of their usable parts and sold as used parts either upon the wholesale or retail market; provided further, such yard, business or establishment is not a junk yard within the meaning of this article. 
Fenced area means a solid partition or an opaque screening not less than six (6) feet in height through which the enclosed area cannot be seen. 
Junk means any used items of commerce which principally comprises iron, steel, brass, copper, zinc or their alloys or any other base metals and which is commonly bought for the purpose of resale and refabrication, either or both (see O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1). The term "junk" also means worn out and discarded material that may be returned to some use, especially old rope, chain, iron, copper, parts of machinery, electrical and electronics equipment and bottles gathered or bought up by tradesmen called junk dealers, hence rubbish of any kind, odds and ends. 
Junk business means the pursuit for profit of purchasing old iron, brass, bottles and things of that sort and selling them again in the condition in which the were purchased by the dealer. 
Junk dealer means any person having a fixed place of business, or officer, agent and employee of any person who engages in the purchase of used items of commerce principally composed of iron, steel, brass, copper, zinc or their alloys or any other base metals and which is commonly bought for the purpose of resale and refabrication, either or both. 
Salvage operation or salvage yard means a business, the principal activity of which is buying, selling, exchanging, storing, sorting, packing or dismantling of waste, used or secondhand materials or vehicles or parts thereof to consumers for personal use with only incidental residual transfer on a nonretail basis. An automobile wrecking establishment and a junk dealer are engaged in salvage operations. 
Scrap means scrap iron and scrap steel or other base metals and secondhand materials which are only fit for remanufacturing or reprocessing without reference to whether it is new or old. Scrap metal and glass having no commercial value except for remelting purposes shall be considered scrap. 
Scrap yard operator or scrap dealer means any person or his agent engaging, in a fixed location, in the purchase of scrap iron or steel and other base materials for the purpose of cutting or baling or otherwise preparing the same for sale to mills for remelting, with only incidental residual transfer on a retail basis. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § III) 
Sec. 9-74. - Enforcement and penalty. 
The investigation and enforcement of the separate provisions of this article or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be the responsibility of the county ordinance officer, who shall be authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this article in the unincorporated areas of the county, and on or in county-owned or operated facilities or property, in accordance with all applicable laws of the state. A fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each violation of any part of this article for each day that an operator of an establishment authorized by this article is in violation of any part of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § IV; Mo. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 9-75. - Jurisdiction and appeals. 
The jurisdiction for actions brought pursuant to this article shall be in the magistrate court of the county. Any appeal from errors in judgment by the enforcing officials shall be taken to the board of commissioners. All other appeals shall be in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § V) 
Sec. 9-76. - Conflicts with other provisions. 
(a)  If any term, part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, phrase or word of this article conflicts with any term, part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, phrase or word of any other county or state code, ordinance or statute, though legally valid and effective, that term, part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, phrase or word which sets the higher standards shall be the valid one. The term "higher standard" for the purposes of this article means the standard setting the most restrictive requirements as measured by current standards for each item or condition involved. 
(b)  Whenever the regulations of this article require a greater width of setback or other open space, or impose other restrictive standards than are required under other statutes or ordinances, the regulations of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, §§ VI, XIX) 
Sec. 9-77. - Scope. 
(a)  The intention of the board of commissioners in enacting this article is to provide comprehensive regulations respecting scrap metal, junk and automobile salvage operations including, but not limited to, certain specialized activities. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all the following uses: 
(1)  Automobile or equipment wrecking, salvage or parts yards; 
(2)  Junk or salvage yard as defined above; 
(3)  Any other operation which, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, is similar in operation or appearance to the uses listed in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § VII) 
Sec. 9-78. - Records and reports. 
The operators of any operation or establishment authorized by this article who deal in, dismantle or process for scrap any automotive equipment, farm machinery or heavy equipment shall keep for three (3) years a record book showing all identification numbers such as motor number, body number, serial numbers and license numbers of any such equipment received by their operation or establishment for stripping, processing or resale; provided such record shall also show date and place of acquisition, person or firm from which the equipment was received and final disposition of the equipment; provided further, that an immediate report by telephone shall be made to the county sheriff's office upon receipt of any automotive equipment, farm machinery or heavy equipment, and such equipment shall not be dismantled or disposed of for twenty-four (24) hours after notification of the county sheriff's office, unless authorized by the sheriff's office to do so. Any electrical or electronics equipment received by any operator of any operation or establishment authorized by this article shall be handled as prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § VIII) 
Sec. 9-79. - Design and site development. 
(a)  Generally. The design of all structures, including signs, fences, opaque screenings and buildings, and the site development of all open portions of the operations or establishments authorized by this article and created after July 1, 1991, shall have no substantial adverse effect through appearance or functional operating characteristics on the surrounding area. The amount of open working space on the site shall be sufficient to permit the proper functioning of the operation without use of any public right-of-way as a temporary or permanent storage area. 
(b)  Fences and aisles. All activities of any operation or establishment authorized by this article shall be conducted within a building, within a fenced area, or within an opaque screened area. An aisle of not less than three (3) feet in width shall be maintained immediately adjacent to, and on the inside of, such fence, which aisle shall remain clear and unobstructed to the sky at all times. 
(c)  Off-street loading and parking spaces. Off-street loading and off-street parking as necessary to serve the operations of the establishment shall be provided and maintained. 
(d)  Signs. The erection and maintenance of signs on or adjacent to any building, operation or establishment authorized by this article shall be in accordance with the provisions established by this article and shall not contradict any other existing ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § IX) 
Sec. 9-80. - Location. 
(a)  Operations and establishments authorized by this article shall be located no closer than four hundred (400) feet from property lines in a residential area; provided, however, the board of commissioners, upon application from the owner, shall exempt establishments existing on July 1, 1991, from this setback requirement. The board of commissioners, upon application from the owner and after a hearing before the board, may exempt establishments not in existence on July 1, 1991, from this setback requirement if, in the sole judgement and discretion of the board of commissioners, the enforcement of this restriction would cause a financial hardship on the owner because of limited area of operation. 
(b)  The location of such operation shall be such that it shall have no substantial adverse effect on the appropriate use of abutting properties or the surrounding area, on private incentive to proper maintenance and rehabilitation of structures in the area, on the marketability of nearby industrial or commercial land, or on the appearance of the area as seen from principal thoroughfares. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § X) 
Sec. 9-81. - Sanitation. 
The premises of any operation or establishment authorized by this article shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept free of materials which tend to attract insects, rodents and vermin. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XI) 
Sec. 9-82. - Storage of vehicles and materials. 
Storage of vehicle bodies or assemblies or other junk, scrap metal or salvage materials shall be in accordance with this article; provided further, vehicles and materials being processed or intended for processing shall not be parked, stored or displayed outside of the fence surrounding the premises, on a public right-of-way, or on roofs of buildings. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XII) 
Sec. 9-83. - Fire protection and prevention. 
(a)  The following fire prevention measures shall be required: 
(1)  The premises shall be kept free from any condition which creates an undue fire hazard; 
(2)  Every operation or establishment authorized by this article shall maintain, in good working condition, extinguishers sufficient to contain potential fires within its own dependence upon outside help; 
(3)  All cutting and burning operations shall be carried on in an area which is not likely to create a fire hazard; 
(4)  Open circulation areas shall be provided to all parts of the yard for the purposes of fire detection and firefighting. 
(b)  No burning of trash, rubber, car bodies or other material shall be allowed as part of the salvage operation of any establishment or yard authorized by this article, unless such burning is a condition granted in writing upon the permit for operation of such yard or establishment; provided upon the face or reverse of the permit the following is written and signed by the person issuing the permit: "This permit conveys the authority for the beneficiary to burn ___________ between the hours of _______ and _______ under the following conditions: ___________," or words to that effect. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XIII) 
Sec. 9-84. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Required generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or permit to be established any building, lot, parcel of land or premises for any of the operations or establishments authorized by this article or to construct any building or part thereof to be used as, or occupied in which to carry on, engage in, conduct or permit to be carried on, engaged in or conducted, such operations or establishments as authorized by this article, after July 1, 1991, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the clerk of the board of commissioners, which permit shall be granted and existing in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Specific operations. Individual permits shall be required for one or all of the following operations: 
(1)  Automobile equipment wrecking, automobile salvage or automobile parts yard; 
(2)  Junk or salvage yard; 
(3)  Any other operation which in the opinion of the board of commissioners is similar in operation or appearance to the uses listed in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2). 
Each permit shall state the type(s) of operation(s) for which it is issued. 
(c)  Additional incidental business. The holder of a permit to operate one of the businesses provided for in this article who incidentally in the conduct of his regular licensed operation engages, upon the same premises, in another legitimate business provided for in this article shall not be required to apply for a license to engage in such incidental businesses; provided, however, the regulations and restrictions required by this article for each type of yard operation shall apply as well to any legitimate incidental business engaged in by such yard or operator. 
(d)  Application and fee; notice, hearing. An application for a permit, either original or renewal, shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be accompanied by a plat plan which clearly indicates storage space, off-street loading and parking space, working space, pathways, structures, including character of materials, water pipelines, fire extinguisher locations, cutting and burning areas, drainage ditches and channels, and showing all buildings, fences, gates and signs. 
(e)  Certification by investigating officials. Pursuant to the provisions of this section, the application shall be forwarded to the following investigating officials, each of whom shall examine the application in the light of the requirements of this article: 
Investigating officials: 
Building inspector 
Fire chief 
Health officer 
Public nuisance officer 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XIV) 
Sec. 9-85. - Termination and renewal of permits. 
A permit for any operation or establishment authorized by this article shall terminate one year from the date of issuance and shall thereafter be void. A permit issued pursuant to this article may not be transferred from the permit recipient to another party. An application for renewal of a permit shall be granted upon written application, made and processed in the same manner as required in the instance of the original application for such permit, and the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each permit location. Any person holding a permit for any operation or establishment as authorized by this article who shall discontinue business for a period exceeding ninety (90) days shall thereby be deemed to have relinquished all his rights and interest in or under the permit, and the permit shall automatically become null and void. It shall not be reinstated or reissued except in the same manner as required in the instance of the issuance of the original permit; provided further, that no fee or prorated part thereof shall be refunded, but the board of commissioners may reduce the permit fee to twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) upon any application for a permit which has six (6) months or less to run before the beginning of the next permit year, January first to December thirty-first annually. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XV) 
Sec. 9-86. - Conditions. 
(a)  State license. In addition to the requirements of this article, the applicant for any operation or establishment authorized by this article shall provide, as a part of the process of applying for or renewing a permit, a license issued by the state board of registration for used motor vehicle dismantlers, rebuilders and salvage dealers (see O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Bond for restoration of site. Any permit granted shall be on condition that the applicant shall, within thirty (30) days after the site shall have ceased to be used as a scrap, salvage, junk, equipment and material storage or parts yard, or any other operation or establishment as authorized by this article, restore such site to a safe, clean and presentable condition, to the satisfaction of the building inspector and health officer. To provide for any costs in the restoration of the site, the applicant shall execute to the county and deliver to the county clerk a bond at the time of obtaining a permit as required herein. This bond shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In order to guarantee the faithful performance of such bond, the applicant shall deposit with the county either cash, a certified check, a letter of credit in the amount of such bond or other good and valuable security as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Unlawful dismantling or stripping of automobiles and other machinery and equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to dismantle, repair, strip or remove from any automobile, truck, farm machinery, heavy equipment, electrical or electrical units, equipment or assemblies outside of the premises of an authorized yard or establishment holding a permit for such purposes, unless proof of ownership of the vehicle or equipment by the person doing the dismantling, repair or stripping of that vehicle or equipment can be established by either a valid title certificate on the vehicle or equipment, valid proof of insurance, a valid receipt from the purchase of a tag, or a valid bill of sale on vehicles or equipment for which no certificate of title need be obtained pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-3-4; or unless and until written authorization is obtained from the sheriff's office for such undertaking; provided further, that such permit or authorization shall expire forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after the date of issuance; provided that a nominal fee not to exceed one dollar ($1.00) may be charged for the issuance of such permit or written authorization; provided further, that the permit or written authorization is not transferable from the person in whose name it is issued; provided, however, nothing in this section is intended to apply to travelers or persons engaged in making emergency repairs which will enable them either to proceed on their journey or to remove their vehicle from public or private property. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XVI) 
Sec. 9-87. - Permit not to serve as business license. 
No business license fee is authorized by this article, and the fee charged for a permit to maintain yards, establishments and operations as described in this article is not to be constructed as a license to engage in any such commercial business. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XVII) 
Sec. 9-88. - Nonconformity of location or use. 
Any operation or establishment authorized by this article which is or may become nonconforming with respect to location or use, or both location and use, or which may become nonconforming through a subsequent rezoning or change of regulations, may continue to operate only by permission of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § XVIII) 
Secs. 9-89—9-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CURFEWS 

Sec. 9-100. - Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Gordon County. 
(2)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
(1)  Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
(2)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated essential services such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, [and/or] utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to article V, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(3)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(1), § 2) 
Sec. 9-102. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Gordon County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(1), § 3) 
Sec. 9-103. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(1), § 4) 
Secs. 9-104—9-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE DURING STATES OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 9-115. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Gordon County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Gordon County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of Gordon County, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Gordon County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(2)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four (4) weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Gordon County, or any portion thereof, where: 
(a)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(b)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(c)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(4)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue [authorize] temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Gordon County Health Department and Gordon [County] Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) [months] in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-116. - Definitions. 
(1)  Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
(2)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)  Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six (6) months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of [Gordon] County. 
(4)  Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(2), § 2) 
Secs. 2-117—2-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 9-125. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Gordon County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Gordon County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(3), § 1) 
Sec. 9-126. - Definitions. 
(1)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(2)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(3), § 2) 
Sec. 9-127. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(3), § 3) 
Secs. 9-128—9-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 9-135. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Gordon County consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 1) 
Sec. 9-136. - Definitions. 
(1)  Building contractor. As used in this article, the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
(2)  Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: 
(a)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(b)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
(3)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(4)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three (3) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 2) 
Sec. 9-137. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Gordon County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 3) 
Sec. 9-138. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 4) 
Sec. 9-139. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 5) 
Sec. 9-140. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 6) 
Sec. 9-141. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 7) 
Sec. 9-142. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 10-9-01(4), § 8) 
Chapter 10 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 19, 1995, enacted a new county personnel system, which superseded, in effect repealed Ch. 10, personnel, which consisted of Arts. I—V, §§ 10-1, 10-2, 10-26—10-30, 10-51—10-59, 10-81—10-95 and 10-116—10-119, and derived from an ordinance of Apr. 15, 1977; a motion of Dec. 2, 1986; and a motion of May 1, 1990. For the specific disposition of the chapters of the ordinance enacting the personnel policies, see the history notes following the sections herein. Additionally, an ordinance adopted Apr. 16, 1996, substance abuse policy statement, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included within this chapter as Art. III, §§ 10-61—10-68. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; smoking prohibitions, § 6-151 et seq. 
State Law reference— Retirement benefits under Georgia firemen's pension fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-100 et seq.; retirement benefits under peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-80. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - County personnel system. 
The Gordon County Personnel Policies create a system of employment which recognizes that the county employees covered by the system should be selected and promoted according to their skills, knowledge and abilities, and that employees who perform satisfactorily should be retained in their positions as long as the positions exist and regardless of factors not associated with their performance and conduct compatible with the trust inherent in public service, the administrative necessity for the position held, availability of funds and organizational needs of the government unit. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § A) 
Sec. 10-2. - Establishment. 
These policies have been established by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the "board." The board and participating elected officials have included specified employees under their administration in the system. This action was taken to provide a fair, equitable, and productive work environment. The system and these policies have been enabled by the signatures of the participating elected officials and by an ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § B) 
Sec. 10-3. - Purpose. 
These policies have been adopted to provide for the recruitment and development of the best available employee for each position in the service of the county. They provide for the establishment of orderly procedures for administering the following principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment. 
(2)  Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work. 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to assure high-quality performance. 
(4)  Retraining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees from the work force whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected. 
(5)  Assuring equal employment opportunity through the fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry, disability, sex, or religion and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. 
(6)  Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the results of an election or a nomination for office. 
(7)  Establishing uniform benefits and personnel procedures where applicable. 
(8)  Complying with applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § C) 
State Law reference— Employment of blind, visually handicapped, deaf and otherwise physically disabled persons, O.C.G.A. §§ 30-1-2, 34-6A-1 et seq.; age discrimination in employment, O.C.G.A. § 34-1-2; discrimination against employee for attending judicial proceeding in response to court order or process, O.C.G.A. § 34-1-3; sex discrimination in employment, O.C.G.A. § 34-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Positions covered. 
These policies apply to the career service positions in all departments under the administration of the board and of the participating elected officials, including those employees whose positions are subsidized from federal, state or other sources. The following are the exceptions: 
(1)  Federal equal employment law recognizes that neither elected officials nor members of their personal staffs should be covered by legislation creating full-time positions, and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21 exempts elected officials or persons appointed to positions for specified terms from civil service coverage. Therefore, the board and the participating elected officials will determine which positions in the county are policy-making, personal staff, or appointments for specified terms, and shall exclude these positions from coverage under these policies. All other full-time and part-time positions that are included in the classification plan are covered. 
(2)  Employees of other agencies partially funded by the county and employees of departments jointly funded by the county and municipalities and/or organizations located within the geographic boundaries of the county. 
(3)  Members of appointed or elected boards, commissions or authorities. 
(4)  Employees who have been employed by the county for less than six (6) months or who are on an extended initial working test period. 
(5)  Part-time or temporary positions unless specifically covered by action of the board. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § D) 
Sec. 10-5. - Administration and enforcement. 
The county administrator, as the chief executive officer of the county, with the cooperation of the participating elected officials, is responsible for administering and maintaining these policies. The daily implementation and routine administrative duties associated with the system and the policies may be delegated to the human resources director. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § E) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 10-6. - Policy changes. 
The board reserves the right to change or amend these policies at any time, by resolution, if the change does not adversely affect the property interests of the employees. Proposed changes will be provided to participating elected officials for their review, comment, and approval. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § F) 
Sec. 10-7. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of explaining and clarifying the personnel policies of the county, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section of word definitions. 
Anniversary date is the date one (1) year from the initial employment date. For leave purposes, the anniversary date shall be that date each subsequent year from the initial date of employment. 
Appeal means the right to appear before the county administrator, or his designee, or the appropriate authority so designated by this chapter to be heard on matters of discrimination, unfair practices, or other rights of applicants or employees under these policies and for review of decisions by the county. 
Board of commissioners or board means the legislative body of the county. 
Career service includes all jobs subject to the terms of the personnel policies, except for those specifically exempted. 
Class means a group of positions sufficiently similar as to the duties performed, degree of supervision exercised or required, minimum requirements of training, experience, and such other characteristics, that the same title, the same tests of fitness, the same schedule of compensation may be applied to each position in the group; and which has been recognized as such in the classification plan established and approved by the county. 
Continuous service is employment which is uninterrupted except for authorized leaves of absence, suspension, or separation due to a reduction in the work force. 
Demotion means the reduction of a regular or working test employee to a position of a lower class. For this purpose, a lower class means a class having a minimum salary lower than the maximum salary for the position in which the individual is employed. 
Department head means any county employee designated as the head or principal administrative officer of any department established in the internal organization of the county as an administrative medium of the county administrator and subordinate to the county administrator. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "department head" may also refer to an elected official or a judicial official. 
Employee means an incumbent of a position as hereinafter defined. 
Exempt employee means an employee who is exempt from the provisions of the wage and hour laws of the Fair Labor Standards Act. All department heads are considered to be exempt employees. 
Full-time position means any employee in a regular position who is scheduled to work at least thirty (30) hours per week. 
Merit increase means a pay adjustment earned due to length of service and satisfactory performance as determined by existing policies and available funding. 
Nonexempt employee means an employee who is covered by the provisions of the wage and hour laws of the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Open competitive vacancy means a position wherein announcement of a vacancy and acceptance of applications is solicited from every segment of the community. 
Part time means any employee working less than thirty (30) hours per week on a continuing basis. 
Performance evaluation means a method of evaluating each employee on a periodic basis as to his performance on the job. 
Position means a job, whether part-time or full-time, temporary or regular, occupied or vacant, composed of specific duties and responsibilities requiring the services of one (1) person. 
Promotion means the filling of a vacancy by the advancement of a regular employee from a position of a lower class. For this purpose, a lower class means any class of positions having a maximum salary lower than the maximum salary of the vacant position. 
Promotional competitive vacancy means a position wherein announcement of a vacancy and acceptance of applications is confined to employees of the county. 
Public notice, unless otherwise expressly stated, means a written notice on a bulletin board accessible to the public during business hours, and other publicity as may be deemed necessary by the county administrator or his designee. 
Regular employee is an employee who has completed his working test period in a satisfactory manner and has obtained status in the career service. 
Resignation means an action separating an employee at his own written or verbal request and is accepted without prejudice, provided that the resignation is not offered to avoid removal for cause. If a resignation is offered to avoid removal for cause, it will not be accepted as a resignation unless it is determined to be clearly in the best interest of the county. A resignation is effective immediately upon acceptance and no further administrative action is required to validate that resignation. 
Salary advancement means an increase in salary, based on quality and length of service within the salary range prescribed for a particular class of positions. 
Salary range adjustment means the allocation of a classification to a higher or lower salary range, due to legislative or administrative action. 
Status is acquired by the satisfactory completion of a working test period by an employee in the classified service. 
Suspension means the temporary removal of an employee from the county for either disciplinary purposes or pending investigation of charges against the employee. A suspension may be with or without pay. 
Temporary employees means those engaged for special activities of the county for a specific period with the definite understanding that their employment is to terminate at the end of the period. Temporary employees will be considered either full-time or part-time, depending upon the number of hours worked per week. No temporary employee will be eligible to accrue privileges or benefits under the provisions of the fringe benefits, insurance and retirement plans. 
Transfer means an action to change an employee from a position in one (1) department to a position in another department within the same classification or a change from one (1) class to another class in the same pay grade. Where an increase or decrease of pay grade is involved, the action will be designated as a "promotion" or a "demotion." 
Vacancy is a position duly created and still existent but not occupied by an employee. 
Working test period describes the status of a newly appointed or promoted employee who is required to serve a six-month working test period to demonstrate satisfactory job performance and who may be released from employment or returned to pre-promotion status without recourse. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 1, § G) 
Editor's note— General rules of construction; definitions, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-8. - Effective date. 
These policies shall become effective on the date adopted, by resolution of the county, and shall remain in effect until duly amended. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XIX, § A) 
Sec. 10-9. - Amendment of personnel policies. 
These policies may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XIX, § D) 
Secs. 10-10—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 

Sec. 10-26. - Applications and examinations. 
(a)  Announcement of vacant positions. Vacancies shall be publicized by posting announcements at the county courthouse or in other places, and by such other means as the county administrator and the human resources director deem advisable for positions for which the county administrator is the hiring authority. Elected officials may establish their own policies for recruitment and selection of vacant positions. Receipt of applications may be limited to present employees or may be opened to the public. The announcements shall: 
(1)  Specify the title and salary range of the vacant positions, qualification requirements, manner of making application, and other pertinent information. 
(2)  Specify the form of the examination if required for the positions. 
(b)  Application forms. Application shall be made on forms provided by the human resources director. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience, and other pertinent information. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. 
(c)  Employment requirements. All positions shall be open to persons who meet the requirements as listed on the public announcement of the examination. Such requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, the following factors: 
(1)  Experience. 
(2)  Education. 
(3)  Training. 
(d)  Receipt and duration of applications. Applications will be accepted only when there is an advertised opening for a position. The applications will be placed on file from all persons desiring employment with the county, and who apply during regular business hours. In order to be considered for employment, all applicants for employment must complete an employment application. All persons shall be informed at the time of application that applications will be placed in an active file for a period of forty-five (45) days. Should another position become available during the forty-five-day period for which a rejected applicant wishes to be considered, the rejected applicant should contact the human resources director and request consideration. 
(e)  Rejection of applications. The human resources director may reject an application which indicates that the applicant is deficient in any or all of the requirements as specified in the public announcement of the vacancy. An application may also be rejected for the practice, or attempted practice, of fraud or deception in the completion of his application or if his past record of employment is determined by the human resources director to be unsatisfactory. Notice of rejection, stating the reason therefor, shall be mailed to the rejected applicant by the human resources director. 
(f)  Open competitive appointments. Positions to be filled by recruitment, from outside the career service, shall be filled through a competitive process open to the public. Such process may include, but not be limited to, ratings of training and experience, written, oral, physical, or performance tests, or any combination of these as determined by the human resources director. The process may take into consideration such factors as education, experience, knowledge, skill, physical fitness, or any other bona fide occupational qualifications which are job-related and which, in the judgment of the human resources director, enter into the determination of the relative suitability of applicants. The human resources director may require the applicant to submit proof of his education, military service, or any other such documentation as he/she deems necessary. All qualifications and tests shall be job-related and shall be administered in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(g)  Promotional appointments. Promotional appointments shall be open to all employees, who meet the training and experience requirements included in the class specification, or who have an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the required knowledge, skills, and abilities. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 2) 
Sec. 10-27. - Appointments. 
(a)  Types of appointments. When a person is initially employed by the county, they shall be given one (1) of the following types of original appointments: 
(1)  Working test. An appointment to a position in the career service. 
(2)  Provisional. An appointment made only in the absence of a qualified applicant. 
a.  When there is a need to fill a vacancy, and a qualified applicant is not available, a provisional appointment may be made. 
b.  Provisional appointments shall not exceed six (6) months. However, extensions may be approved by the county administrator, elected official, or judicial official, where applicable. 
c.  An employee shall not attain regular status while serving on a provisional appointment. 
(3)  Temporary. Temporary appointments may be made to fill positions when the work of the county requires the services of one (1) or more employees on a seasonal or intermittent basis, or in cases of emergency. Temporary appointments shall not exceed one (1) year's consecutive duration. 
(b)  Regular appointment. A career employee, given an original working test appointment, shall be given a regular appointment upon satisfactory completion of the working test period and shall acquire regular status. A working test promotional appointment does not affect an employee's earned regular status and rights acquired in another position. 
(c)  Hiring authority. The county administrator shall serve as the hiring authority for all positions, except for those positions in the department of the elected officials and the judicial officials. The elected officials and the judicial officials shall serve as the hiring authority in their respective departments. Prior to extending an offer of employment to any person as a department head, the county administrator shall make a recommendation to and receive approval from the board of commissioners for that offer of employment as a department head. The board of commissioners, based upon the recommendation of the county administrator, shall approve said offer of employment as a department head by a majority vote, with at least three (3) commission members affirming the recommendation of the county administrator. In addition, prior to advertising any newly created position for county employment, the county administrator shall likewise obtain approval by a majority vote of the board of commissioners, with at least three (3) commission members voting in the affirmative, for the advertisement of the newly created position. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 3; Ord. of 9-2-03, § 1) 
Sec. 10-28. - Working test period. 
(a)  Objective. The working test period shall be regarded as an integral part of the selection process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his position, and for rejecting any employee whose performance is not satisfactory. 
(b)  Duration. The working test period shall be six (6) months in duration. 
(c)  Promotional appointments. The working test period shall be used in connection with promotional appointments in the same manner as it is used for original entrance appointments. If a person is removed during his working test period following a promotion, he may be considered for return to his former position, or a similar position, if one is available. 
(d)  Interruption of working test. If an employee is laid off during a working test period, and his services have been satisfactory and he is subsequently reemployed in the same department, he shall be given credit for the portion of the working test period completed before he was laid off. 
(e)  Dismissal during working test. During the working test period, an employee may be terminated for the following reasons: 
(1)  At any time during the working test period, the department head may remove an employee if, in the department head's opinion, the working test period indicates that such employee is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily, or that his habits and the lack of dependability do not merit his continuance with the service, or for causes which would subject a regular employee to disciplinary action. A report in writing shall be sent to the human resources director within three (3) days after the effective date of the dismissal. 
(2)  An employee found to have been appointed through fraud shall be removed within ten (10) calendar days of notification of the department head to this effect. 
(3)  A department head may demote an employee to a lower class position during the working test period. A written report of such demotion and the reasons therefor must be filed with the human resources director within three (3) days after the effective date of the demotion. 
(4)  Working test period reports. At least twenty (20) working days prior to the expiration of the employee's working test period, the department head shall notify the human resources director, in writing, whether the employee has satisfactorily completed, or is expected to satisfactorily complete, his working test period. 
(5)  An employee may be released during the working test period without recourse and as such has no right to avail himself or herself to a grievance procedure. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. 4) 
Sec. 10-29. - Promotions, transfers and demotions. 
(a)  Policy. Vacancies in higher positions in the career service shall be filled, as far as practicable, by promotion from lower classes. To accomplish this purpose, closed examinations may be held. When the county administrator and the human resources director determine that there is a sufficient number of well-qualified eligibles within the service, they may direct that a closed competition be held. 
(b)  Political or partisan endorsement prohibited. No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement for promotions to positions in the classified service; only merit and fitness for promotion shall be considered. 
(c)  Promotional examinations. The human resources director, working in conjunction with appointed department heads, elected officials and/or judicial officials, shall conduct promotional examinations in accordance with these regulations. In promotional examinations, the human resources director shall admit to the process all employees who meet the published qualification requirements. Oral interviews are recognized as one (1) form of promotional examinations. 
(d)  Intradepartmental transfers. The appropriate department head may, at any time, transfer an employee under his jurisdiction from one (1) position to another in the same department upon first obtaining the recommendation of the human resources director and approval of the county administrator. 
(e)  Interdepartmental transfers. A transfer of an employee from one (1) department to another shall have the recommendation of both department heads concerned and the approval of the county administrator or his designee. Requests for such transfer shall show how the employee concerned meets the qualification requirements of the class to which the transfer is proposed. 
(f)  Voluntary demotions. An employee may be voluntarily demoted to a vacant position, in a lower class, subject to approval of his department head and the county administrator. The county administrator shall determine whether the employee is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities of the lower class of position. No employee shall be voluntarily demoted until he has submitted a written request that such action be considered. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. V) 
Sec. 10-30. - Employee performance evaluation. 
(a)  Objective. The county administrator shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a job-related system for evaluating the work performance of all employees in the career service. The purpose of the employee performance evaluation shall be primarily to inform employees how well they are performing their work and how they can improve their work performance. The performance evaluation may also be used in determining order of layoff, as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer, or dismissal, and for such other purposes as set forth in these regulations. 
(b)  Period of evaluation. On original appointment, or on promotions, all employees, except temporary workers, shall be evaluated in writing by the supervisor, and a recommendation shall be made within twenty (20) days of the end of their working test period and semiannually thereafter. An employee shall not be eligible for a pay raise until the performance evaluation form has been completely processed. Employees shall also be evaluated at the time of separation. 
(c)  Evaluation. Evaluations shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee and reviewed by the department head. An employee in a supervisory position, who is leaving the position, may be required to submit performance evaluation forms on all the employees under his supervision who have not been evaluated within the previous six-month period. 
(d)  Review with employees. The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated. If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, he may submit, within ten (10) days following the conference with his supervisor, a written statement which shall be attached to the evaluation form and forwarded to the human resources director. 
(e)  Personnel files and performance evaluations confidential. Personnel files and performance evaluations shall be confidential and shall be made available only to: 
(1)  The employee evaluated. 
(2)  His supervisor or department head. 
(3)  The county administrator or his representative. 
(4)  Attorneys representing the county. 
(f)  Changes in evaluation. If for any reason a department head shall request an alteration of the performance evaluation form, after it has been officially submitted to the human resources director, such request shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the reasons for the request. The employee shall also be notified if a change is made in the evaluation. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. VI) 
Sec. 10-31. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the county that effective supervision and employee relations will avoid most matters which necessitate disciplinary action. These rules, and disciplinary action for violation of such rules, are not intended to restrict the rights of anyone, but to insure the rights of all and to secure cooperation and orderliness throughout the career service. The severity of disciplinary action should be related to the gravity of the offense, the employee's record of disciplinary action, the employee's length of service, and the county's practice in similar cases. 
The department head and the human resources director shall make every effort to insure that all employees understand their duties and are aware of the rules and standards that apply to them. Every effort shall also be made to consistently enforce rules and standards. Fairness, promptness, and legal sufficiency shall govern the disciplinary process. 
In applying these guidelines for disciplinary actions, the concept of "progressive discipline" shall be followed. "Progressive discipline" is defined as meaning that when disciplinary actions are necessary, they are gradually increased and applied in terms of ascending severity. Each action is intended to correct unacceptable behavior. With progressive discipline, employees shall be given an opportunity to correct their behavior before a more severe action is applied. The objective is to apply the least severe action which will improve the employee's performance to an acceptable level. 
(b)  Types of disciplinary action. The forms of discipline to be utilized by the county, when deemed necessary, are as follows: 
(1)  Employee counseling (oral reprimand). When an employee does not comply with the rules and standards of his position, the department head may counsel orally with the employee in order to clearly define areas of deficient job performance and steps needed for improvement, depending upon the severity of the deficiency. (A written record of the oral reprimand should be maintained by the immediate supervisor.) 
(2)  Written reprimand. A department head may submit a written reprimand to an employee when oral warnings prove ineffective or when severe initial action is required. A copy shall be filed in the employee's personnel file. Included in the letter shall be a statement of the employee's right to appeal and appeal procedures. Two (2) reprimands within a twelve-month period for similar offenses may be grounds for dismissal. 
(3)  Suspension. A department head may, for disciplinary purposes, suspend without pay any employee in his department for a length of time that he considers appropriate, not to exceed ten (10) working days. However, the department head has the option of making an accumulated leave in lieu of suspending him without pay, and the department head may apply this equivalent deduction to all or part of the employee's suspension time. A written statement, specifically setting forth reasons for such suspension, shall be furnished to the affected employee by his department head, at the time of the suspension, and a copy filed with the human resources director. With the approval of the county administrator, an employee may be suspended for a longer period, pending the investigation or trial of criminal charges against him. However, the filing of criminal charges against an employee shall be evaluated to determine if there is a negative impact upon the county of sufficient magnitude to justify suspension. The fact that a person is acquitted of the charges or that the charges are dropped does not necessarily mean that the suspension or other disciplinary action will be revoked. 
(4)  Demotion. With the prior approval of the county administrator, a department head may reduce the salary of an employee or demote the employee, for cause. A written statement of the reasons for any such action shall be furnished to the affected employee, by his department head, on or before the effective date of the action, and a copy filed with the human resources director. 
(5)  Dismissals. Dismissals are separations made for delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency, inability to perform the work of the position satisfactorily, or conduct which seriously jeopardizes the health, welfare or safety of the county, its employees or the general public. 
(c)  Progressive discipline. The essential elements and responsibilities of progressive discipline are as follows: 
(1)  Department heads and employees shall be mutually responsible that all employees understand their assigned duties, rules, regulations, policies, and procedures which are applicable. 
(2)  Department heads shall be responsible for prompt and consistent enforcement of all applicable rules, regulations, policies, and procedures which are applicable. 
(3)  Department heads and employees shall be mutually responsible for understanding and following the principles of good employee relations. 
(4)  Department heads shall be responsible for proper documentation of all disciplinary actions taken. 
(d)  Reasons for disciplinary action. Listed below are some of the reasons which could be cause for disciplinary action referred to in subsection (a) above, but disciplinary action is not limited to the offenses listed: 
(1)  Being convicted of a crime for which a prison sentence is imposed. 
(2)  Too much lost time. 
(3)  Being absent without leave. 
(4)  Excessive tardiness or unapproved absences from work. 
(5)  Inefficiency. 
(6)  Abuse of county property. 
(7)  Willfully giving false statements to supervisors, officials, the public, or the board of commissioners. 
(8)  Violation of county administrative regulations or departmental rules, or public safety standard operating procedures. 
(9)  Drinking of alcoholic beverages while working, being intoxicated on the job, or using other than prescribed drugs while working. 
(10)  Discovery of a false statement in an application, which had not been detected previously, if such statement is of material evidence to the employee's current duties. 
(11)  Acceptance of gratuities in conflict with the policy outlined in section 10-33 of this chapter. 
(12)  Refusal to be examined by a physician designated by the county when so directed. 
(13)  Political activity in conflict with county policies. 
(14)  Borrowing county equipment for personal use. 
(15)  Conduct, on or off the job, unbecoming to a county employee, or conduct which brings discredit to the county, if the employee is provided with written specific incidents upon which the charge is based. 
(16)  Insubordination. 
(17)  Failure to perform the duties and responsibilities of his/her position at an acceptable level of competence. 
(e)  Dismissal, suspension, or demotion of department heads. The county administrator has the authority to dismiss, suspend, or demote a department head for cause in accordance with the guidelines outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  Notice of disciplinary action. In all cases, the immediate supervisor shall notify the employee of the action taken and a copy of such notice will be retained in the employee's personnel file except in the case of a verbal reprimand. 
(g)  Appeal rights. A regular employee who is dismissed, suspended, or demoted shall be given written specific reasons for the action and advised of appeal rights in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Within five (5) work days of receipt of the written reasons for the action, the employee may counsel with the county administrator or his designee about the action. This meeting shall not include a representative of the employee nor other management representatives. 
(2)  The county administrator or his designee, or where applicable, the elected official or judicial official, shall give the employee a written response within five (5) work days of the meeting with the employee. This response will advise the employee of his rights to appeal to the board of commissioners. In the case of an employee working under the direction of an elected official or a judicial official, the right to appeal shall be with the appropriate elected official or a judicial official. Following that appeal to the appropriate elected official or judicial official, any further appeals shall be to the appropriate court of law with jurisdiction of the matter. 
(3)  A request for a hearing before the board of commissioners shall be submitted in writing to the county administrator or his designee within five (5) work days of receipt of the county administrator's response to the employee. 
(4)  The county administrator or his designee shall schedule the hearing as soon as practical after receipt of the request, but within fifteen (15) work days. 
(5)  The purpose of the hearing is for presentation of factual reasons for the action taken and for the employee to rebut these reasons and/or to show that the action taken was not justified. Either party may be represented by an attorney or other persons, but formal rules of evidence shall not be required. 
(6)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall exercise full authority to restrict or prohibit testimony that is irrelevant to the original written reasons for the disciplinary action. 
(7)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be by majority vote, taken in executive session, after the close of the hearing. Such decision shall be final. 
(8)  Either side may, at its own expense, provide for a written record of this hearing. The county administrator or his designee shall in any event provide stenographic assistance to record time and place of meeting, persons present and presenting testimony, the decision of the board of commissioners, and a written response to the employee within five (5) work days. 
(9)  The intent of time limits provided in this section is to provide for an expeditious settlement of appeals. A violation of these limits shall not prejudice the position of either party after a showing of reasonable cause for being unable to conform to the time limit. 
(10)  It shall be a violation of this policy for any member of county government to interfere, in any way, with disciplinary actions except following written appeals as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. VII) 
Sec. 10-32. - Separations. 
(a)  Resignation. To resign in good standing, an employee must, in writing, give his department head at least fourteen (14) calendar days notice. Normally, failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may result in a denial of reemployment rights. However, the department head, with the approval of the county administrator, may exempt from this penalty an employee who has given less than the required notice when exceptional circumstances warrant such exemption. 
All notices are final when accepted. Any employee who resigns and then wishes to return to work for the county shall be required to complete an application and must follow the same procedures as other applicants who are applying for the position under open, competitive appointments. 
(b)  Abandonment of position. An employee who, without valid reason, fails to report to work for three (3) consecutive days without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and reported as having abandoned his position. Such an employee is not eligible for reemployment. 
(c)  Layoffs. Any involuntary separation not involving delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency, or safety shall be considered a layoff. 
(1)  When, for any reason, it becomes necessary to reduce the working force in a department, regular employees shall be laid off on the basis of the following factors to be weighed equally: 
a.  Length of service in class. 
b.  Length of service with the county. 
c.  Average of performance ratings for the last three (3) years. 
(2)  When a department head believes that a certain individual is essential to the efficient operation of the department or organizational unit, because the individual possesses special skills or abilities and the department head wishes to retain this individual in preference to a person with a higher rating as provided above, the department head shall submit a written request to the county administrator for permission to do so. This request shall set forth, in detail, the specific skills and abilities possessed by the individual and the reasons why such individual is essential to the effective operation of the department. With the approval of the county administrator, the individual may be retained. 
(3)  If a regular employee is scheduled to be laid off, he may be offered a demotion to a lower class, if a vacancy exists and if he is qualified to fill positions in the lower class involved. 
(4)  Prior to a reduction in force, the names and job titles of all regular employees scheduled for layoff shall be submitted to the county administrator for approval, and until he has approved and confirmed the names submitted for layoff, no layoff shall be consummated. 
(5)  Regular employees to be laid off shall be notified, in writing, by the county administrator or his designee at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the effective date of the layoff. 
(6)  There shall be no appeal of separation by layoff, but the regular employee shall have the right of appeal if he believes these procedures have been improperly used. 
(d)  Disability. The county will comply with all state and federal statutes and regulations relating to the treatment of persons with disabilities. A department head may direct any employee under his jurisdiction to be examined by a physician designated by the county, and/or to provide a medical release for any existing pertinent medical records if the department head reasonably suspects that the employee is not able to perform the essential functions of the job. When a disability is discovered which impairs the effectiveness of a regular employee's job performance, or which makes their continuance on the job a danger to themselves or to others, the following action shall be taken: 
(1)  If the disability is correctable, the employee shall be allowed a specified time, as determined by the physician, to have it corrected. If they fail to take steps to have the disability corrected within this specified time, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action or layoff. 
(2)  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the department head, subject to the approval of the county administrator, shall: Make reasonable accommodations to assist the employee to perform job duties. If reasonable accommodations cannot be made, the department head shall: Attempt to place the employee in another position which the employee can perform satisfactorily. If that cannot be accomplished successfully, the department head shall: Take steps to separate the employee from the county's service through retirement or layoff. 
(e)  Loss of job eligibility. Any employee who is unable to do their job adequately, because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement, shall be separated by a layoff. 
(f)  Dismissals. See section 10-31. 
(g)  Death. When a regular employee dies while in the service of the county, their estate shall be eligible to receive payment for their earned salary and accumulated annual leave. 
(h)  Effective date. The effective date of separation will be as listed below: 
(1)  Separations shall be effective on the last day of work. Accrued annual leave payment shall be calculated on that date, and no additional benefits shall accrue. 
(2)  Separation of an employee, who is unable to return to work for medical reasons, following use of all sick and annual leave or leave without pay, shall be effective on the last day of approved leave. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. VIII) 
Sec. 10-33. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Personnel transactions. All personnel records of employees of the county covered under these policies and all other records and materials relating to the administration of the career service personnel system shall be considered confidential and the property of the county. Information which is obtained in the course of official duties shall not be released by any employee other than by those charged with this responsibility as part of their official duties. Only that information which is required by federal and state law to be made available to the general public shall be released in cases when written request for such information is made to the human resources director. In all such cases, the employee shall be notified by the human resources director that a request to review information contained in the personnel records of the employee has been received. The employee shall have the opportunity to be present at any review of his personnel file by any member of the general public. 
All appointments, separations, and other personnel transactions shall be made on forms designated by the county administrator or his designee. 
Personnel files will be maintained in the human resources department and shall be confidential. Access is available only to: 
(1)  An employee. 
(2)  The supervisor or department head. 
(3)  The county administrator or his representative. 
(4)  Attorneys representing the county. 
(5)  Board of commissioners. 
Upon separation, a reference release form may be signed by the employee, indicating that reference information may be given to potential future employers. The employee may sign this form at his option. 
(b)  Public inspection. The following information relative to employees, and former employees, is available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with such procedures as the county administrator or his designee may prescribe, such as: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Class. 
(3)  Title. 
(4)  Salary. 
(c)  Destruction of records. Employee service records shall be maintained according to state and federal standards after termination of employment. Such records may be kept, in their original form or in any other duplicate form that the human resources director deems appropriate. All other records, including correspondence, applications, and examinations may be destroyed after two (2) years. An employee data card, consisting of name, social security number, address, date of hire, date of termination, and rate of pay, will be maintained indefinitely. 
(d)  Attendance records. Regular attendance reports shall be prepared and submitted, by each department head, as requested by the county administrator and in the form designated by him. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. IX) 
Sec. 10-34. - Attendance and leave. 
(a)  Hours of work. The established work week and the hours of work shall, insofar as practicable, be uniform and shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the county and the reasonable needs of the public who may be required to do business with various county departments and with due regard to time commitments of staff outside usual office hours. The work schedule for each department shall be established by the department head with the approval of the county administrator. 
(b)  Lunch period. Lunch periods shall be scheduled in a manner to best serve the public. Employees are expected to utilize their lunch period during the hours designated by their supervisor. This time cannot be accumulated and can in no instance be saved for the purpose of leaving work early. 
(c)  Attendance. Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all persons in his or her department and shall keep complete attendance records including annual leave, sick leave, overtime, etc. Records of attendance shall be reported as provided in section 10-33. 
(d)  Holidays. The following days are designated as official holidays for employees in the career service: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  Martin Luther King Day. 
(3)  Spring Holiday. 
(4)  National Memorial Day. 
(5)  Independence Day. 
(6)  Labor Day. 
(7)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(8)  Friday after Thanksgiving Day. 
(9)  Christmas Eve. 
(10)  Christmas Day. 
Whenever a holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be designated a substitute holiday and observed as the official holiday. When the holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be designated as the official holiday. An employee who is not on approved leave, and fails to report on his or her scheduled work day before or after a holiday, shall not be paid for the holiday. Holidays which occur during annual or sick leave shall not be charged against annual or sick leave. An employee who is required to work on a designated holiday will be afforded a day off in lieu of the holiday, to be taken within the next two (2) pay periods, and shall not accumulate compensatory time. 
(e)  Annual (vacation) leave. Vacations are for the purpose of rejuvenating both physical and mental faculties, and all employees are urged to avail themselves of vacation periods. The following rules shall apply to annual (vacation) leave: 
(1)  No employee shall receive pay, in lieu of vacation, unless recommendation is made by the county administrator and specific approval is given by the board. 
(2)  All full-time employees shall be entitled to earn and accrue annual (vacation) leave. Part-time and temporary employees shall not be eligible for annual leave. 
(3)  Full-time employees begin to accrue annual leave immediately upon employment. Employees under temporary appointment or provisional appointment, and employees not deemed to be in the career service, will not be granted annual leave under these policies. An employee in pay status for a full pay period during a calendar month earns annual leave for that month. 
(4)  Annual leave is accrued at the following rate: 
a.  One-half day per month for employees with 0—3 years of service; 
b.  One (1) day per month for employees with 4—9 years of service; 
c.  One and one-half days per month with 10 plus years of service. 
(5)  An employee reemployed, after a break in service, shall not receive annual accrual credits for previous service. 
(6)  A request for annual leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor. Leave may be taken only after approval by the appropriate department head, so that, insofar as practicable, the department can function without the hiring of additional help. 
(7)  Unused annual leave, not to exceed thirty (30) days, may be carried into the next fiscal year. It is the intent of these rules to have employees take their annual leave yearly. 
(8)  When an employee is separated from service, he shall be paid for unused annual leave of up to maximum accrual. 
(f)  Sick leave. Sick leave shall be granted to an eligible employee for the following reasons: 
(1)  In the case of actual sickness or disability of the employee or for medical, dental, or eye examinations, maternity leave, or treatment for which arrangements cannot be made outside of working hours. 
(2)  When the employee is required to care for a sick or injured spouse, child, or parent or guardian. Sick leave also shall be granted when the employee is required to care for a sick or injured relative who is domiciled in the employee's household. The employee shall report his illness prior to his scheduled work time if possible. If not, he shall see that his illness is reported within thirty (30) minutes after the time he is scheduled to report to work. 
(3)  Those employees entitled to earn annual leave shall also be eligible to earn sick leave. 
(4)  Full-time employees begin to accrue sick leave, immediately upon employment, at the rate of one-half day per month. Part-time and temporary employees shall not be eligible for sick leave. 
(5)  A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by a department head to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
a.  Any period of absence consisting of three (3) or more consecutive working days. 
b.  To support a request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on vacation leave. 
c.  Leave of any duration, if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate may be required. 
(6)  Unused sick leave, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, may be carried into the next fiscal year. This is the maximum allowable accumulation of sick leave. However, any eligible employee who has reached the maximum allowable accumulation of forty-five (45) days will be paid for the days earned but not taken during that fiscal year which exceed the forty-five (45) allowed days. 
(7)  No sick leave in excess of the leave accumulated to the employee's credit may be granted unless such sick leave advance is specifically authorized by the county administrator upon recommendation of the department head and the human resources director. 
(8)  A regular employee who separates from the county shall forfeit all unused sick leave. Such leave shall not be reinstated if the employee is rehired. 
(g)  Other types of leave. Listed below are the additional types of leave allowed by the county: 
(1)  Military leave. Military duty means training and service performed by an inductee, enlistee, reservist, or any entrant into a temporary component of the Armed Forces of the United States and time spent in reporting for and returning from such training in service. It also includes active duty training as a reservist in the Armed Forces of the United States or as a member of the National Guard of the United States. 
(2)  Jury duty. An employee shall be given necessary time off without loss of pay when performing jury duty with submission of evidence of actual days spent in court and with prompt return to work when dismissed from service or released by the court. An employee in good standing is also entitled to any court fees received in conjunction with jury duty. 
(3)  Civil leave. Any employee shall be given necessary time off, without the loss of pay, when performing emergency civilian duty in connection with national defense, when performing emergency duty with civil defense in connection with a natural disaster, or for the purpose of voting, when the polls are not open at least two (2) hours before or after an employee's scheduled hours of work. 
(4)  Funeral leave. In the event of death in an employee's immediate family, he or she will be granted paid funeral leave of three (3) scheduled work days. Any additional time taken will be without pay, or annual leave may be used. For the purpose of funeral leave, immediate family is defined as an employee's spouse, child or stepchild and their spouses, father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister, grandparents of the employee or of the employee's spouse, or any relative domiciled in the employee's household. For a brother-in-law or sister-in-law, funeral leave of one (1) day will be granted the day of the funeral. 
(5)  Workers' compensation and injury leave. The basic purpose of workers' compensation is to provide fixed benefits, according to the law, in the event an employee is injured or in an accident while in the course of employment. When injured, no matter how minor the injury, you should report it as promptly as possible to your supervisor. The employee will be on injury leave for a period of time to be determined by the doctor. The employee may request use of sick leave, and/or annual leave, to supplement workers' compensation benefits. 
(6)  Temporary disabilities not covered by workers' compensation. An employee who becomes temporarily disabled shall be allowed to exhaust his or her sick and vacation leave accumulations. After all sick and vacation leave have been used, further extension of leave, either with or without pay, must be specifically authorized by the county administrator, upon recommendation of the department head and the human resources director. 
(7)  Family and medical leave of absence without pay. Employees who have been employed for at least the preceding twelve (12) months and who worked at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) hours during the preceding twelve (12) months are eligible for up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid, job protected leave per year (calendar) in the following situations: 
a.  To care for a newborn child or a newly placed adopted or foster child; 
b.  To care for a seriously ill child, spouse, or parent; or 
c.  Because of the employee's own illness. 
Whenever possible, the county must be given at least thirty (30) days notice of the employee's intention to take leave prior to the date that the leave shall begin. If such notice is not possible, the employee must give as much notice as is practicable. The county reserves the right to require that any such medical leave be certified by the health care provider of the employee, child, spouse, or parent as indicated. Certification will be sufficient if it includes the date on which the illness commenced, the probable duration of the illness, all available appropriate medical facts, and where applicable, a statement that the employee is unable to perform his or her job or needed to care for his or her child, spouse, or parent. Any eligible employee who takes leave under this provision is entitled to return at the same position held prior to taking leave. Further, any benefits the employee had accrued prior to taking leave will be retained when the employee resumes working. Accumulated sick or annual leave is to be used as part of the twelve (12) weeks allowable under FMLA. Absences of one (1) week or more sick leave will be deducted from the FMLA allowance. 
(8)  Inclement weather leave. In the event of inclement weather, and transportation to the office is unsafe for employees, the county administrator may close the office. Employees will be notified of such closing by the news media. 
(9)  Absence without leave. An absence of an employee from duty, including any absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence or as a work schedule variation under the provisions of these regulations, shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be without pay, and shall be cause for disciplinary action. 
(10)  Notification to human resources director. When an employee has taken leave of any kind, or is absent without leave, the department head shall notify the human resources director, in writing, within the same pay period in which the leave is taken or the absence without leave occurs. Such notification may be by notation on a time card or attendance sheet or by memo, giving specific information covering type of leave, dates and hours, and other pertinent data. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. X; Ord. of 12-19-06, § 1) 
Sec. 10-35. - Acceptance of gifts or gratuities; conflict of interest. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the county that no employee shall accept gifts, gratuities, or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom he has official relationships, on business of the county. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles, of negligible value, which are distributed generally, nor to prohibit employees from obtaining loans, from regular lending institutions, nor is it intended to preclude bona fide institutional fund-raising activities. 
It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage, or collusion. No county employee, officer or agent shall participate in the selection, award or administration of a contract, if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. 
(b)  Violations. Any violation of the above policy shall be communicated to the county administrator, and appropriate disciplinary action will be prescribed by the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XI) 
Sec. 10-36. - Appeals and grievance procedures other than for disciplinary action. 
(a)  Policy. The most effective accomplishment of the work of the county requires prompt consideration and equitable adjustment of employee grievances. It is the desire of the county to adjust grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be grievances which will be resolved only after a formal appeal and review. 
The purpose of this rule is to insure that all employees are afforded fair, equitable, and expeditious review of their grievances without fear, coercion, or discrimination. 
(b)  Right of appeal. Any dispute between a supervisor and an employee concerning the interpretation of these policies may be appealed to the county administrator. If it is not satisfactorily resolved by the county administrator, it may be appealed to the board of commissioners, whose decision will be final. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XII) 
Sec. 10-37. - Outside employment. 
(a)  Rules. Outside employment is any paid employment, performed by an employee, in addition to his or her employment with the county. The following criteria will apply to outside employment: 
(1)  Such employment shall not interfere with the efficient performance of the employee's duties. 
(2)  Such employment shall not involve a conflict of interest or conflict with the employee's duties. 
(3)  Such employment shall not involve the performance of duties which the employee should perform as part of his or her employment with the county. 
(4)  Such employment shall not occur during the employee's regular or assigned working hours, unless the employee is on either annual leave, compensatory leave, or leave without pay. 
(5)  No employee, granted permission to engage in outside employment, shall work at such outside employment for a longer period of time than stated in his or her request for permission to engage in such employment. 
(6)  Any employee accepting outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be relieved from his or her outside duties, if and when called upon, for emergency service by the county. 
(7)  In public safety areas, additional criteria may be established to govern the number of hours which may be worked in outside employment due to safety concerns. 
(b)  Procedures. Any county employee desiring to perform outside employment shall first: 
(1)  File a request, in writing, with his or her department head for permission to engage in outside employment. The request shall state the type of employment and the hours of work, the name of the prospective employer, and the place where he is to be employed. 
(2)  The department head may either disapprove or recommend approval of the request. If the department head recommends approval, it may be granted by the county administrator or his designee if the criteria outlined above in subsection (a) are met. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XIII) 
Sec. 10-38. - Employment of relatives. 
(a)  Policy. The county may hire relatives of current employees if the new employee works in an entirely different department or location other than the current employee and does not work in a direct supervisor/employee relationship. Employees with the county at the time of the adoption of this policy are exempt from this provision. 
(b)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this policy should be rarely necessary and must be reviewed by the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XIV) 
Sec. 10-39. - Political activity. 
(a)  Prohibition of political activity. No county employee shall: 
(1)  Use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or nomination for office. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or advise another employee to pay, lend or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purpose. 
(3)  Be a candidate for public or political party elective office, in a partisan primary, general or special election. 
(b)  Federal Hatch Act. The policies in subsection (a) are in accordance with provisions of the U.S. Code, §§ 1501 through 1508. Any employee who performs duties financed, in whole or in part, by federal loans or grants and/or who violates subsection (a) above is also in violation of federal law. 
(c)  Encouraged to vote. Everyone is entitled to his personal political opinion and is encouraged to exercise his right to vote. 
(d)  Nondiscrimination. No county employee shall be hired, promoted or favored or discriminated against with respect to employment because of his/her political opinions or affiliations. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XV) 
State Law reference— State department of public safety employees, political campaigns, O.C.G.A. § 35-2-12; nonelective state officers or employees holding office in political subdivision, political party, etc., O.C.G.A. § 45-10-70; coercion of other county officer, employee, etc., to make political contribution, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-10. 
Sec. 10-40. - Equal opportunity and nondiscrimination. 
(a)  Policy. There shall be no discrimination exercised due to race, national origin, color, religion, creed, age, handicap, sex, or political affiliation with respect to the recruiting and examination of applicants, the hiring of eligibles, or in any personnel transactions affecting employees, including training, promotion, separation and disciplinary actions. All personnel actions shall be based solely upon merit and fitness of the individual. 
(b)  Publicity. The county administrator shall see that information about job opportunities is readily available to potential job applicants. A continuing program shall be conducted to make the equal employment policies known to all citizens of the community and other potential job applicants. 
(c)  Appeals based on alleged discrimination. An applicant or employee who alleges discrimination in any personnel transaction shall have the right to appeal, as provided in section 10-31(g). 
(d)  Facilities accessible to the handicapped. The county will maintain offices in facilities that are accessible to the handicapped, or make any reasonable adjustments to office facilities, to eliminate architectural barriers to the handicapped. Any artificial barriers to employment will be eliminated. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XVI) 
Sec. 10-41. - Sexual harassment. 
The county adopted a sexual harassment policy on December 6, 1994. The terms and conditions of this policy shall be followed by all employees at all times. Please see the language contained in the sexual harassment policy for the procedures which should be followed in any case where allegations of sexual harassment are made. 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XVII) 
Sec. 10-42. - Categories of employment. 
(a)  Types of employees. Listed below are the different types of employees utilized by the county: 
(1)  Regular full-time employee; 
(2)  Regular part-time employee; 
(3)  Temporary employee; 
(4)  Nonexempt; 
(5)  Exempt. 
(b)  Work schedule. The work schedule of the county is listed below: 
(1)  Days and hours of work. The county's work week consists of forty (40) hours. However, the work week may vary for public safety positions. 
(2)  Work week of nonexempt staff. See above. 
(3)  Work week of exempt staff. Exempt employees' work schedules frequently will not coincide with the county's office hours. Exempt employees are expected to schedule their working hours, in consultation with their department head, to include evening meetings and activities outside the county's office hours. The annual salary of exempt employees is remuneration for the total responsibilities of their jobs. On those occasions where special meetings and activities, such as conferences and meetings that require weekend travel, etc., require an exempt employee working a substantial amount of overtime, some time may be given, with pay, to permit the individual to rest and care for personal matters. Such time shall always be given in close proximity to the period of overtime work and in an amount determined at the department head's discretion, after consultation with the county administrator or his designee. It must be used at once, with department head approval, and is not cumulative. 
The nature of many exempt jobs makes it impossible to confine the working schedule within usual office hours. It is the responsibility of both the employee and department head to plan irregular work schedules, when necessary, which permit accomplishment of all the regular duties of the job as designated by the county. The need to grant paid time off, due to excessive overtime, should arise only where special meetings and conferences outside the ongoing duties of the job require substantial additional hours of work. Distinction should be made between these special meetings and conferences and the schedule required by the usual duties of the job. 
An example of "substantial additional hours of work," which might warrant some time off, would be five (5) or more additional hours of work for four (4) consecutive weeks. The department head, after consulting with the county administrator or his designee, may grant one-half day of time off. Time off would be given immediately following the work period as stated above. 
When paid time off is granted to exempt employees, it is important that it be clear that it is not considered additional compensation for time worked, due to additional hours worked. It is to be given as a token of appreciation for the employee's effort and, consequently, bears no defined relationship to the number of hours of overtime worked. 
Frequent need for employees to work overtime, to complete their usual responsibilities, can be a signal to examine the work situation. Is the work load manageable? Is additional help needed? 
(Ord. of 12-19-95, Ch. XVIII) 
Secs. 10-43—10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY 

Sec. 10-61. - Policy established. 
The county is committed to providing a safe work environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees. That commitment is jeopardized when any county employee illegally uses drugs on or off the job, comes to work under their influence, possesses, distributes or sells drugs in the work place, or abuses alcohol on the job. Therefore, the county has established the following policy: 
(1)  It is a violation of county policy for any employee to use, possess, sell, trade, offer for sale, or offer to buy illegal drugs or otherwise engage in the illegal use of drugs on or off the job. 
(2)  It is a violation of company policy for any employee to report to work under the influence of or impaired by alcohol. 
(3)  It is a violation of the county policy for any employee to use prescription drugs illegally, i.e., to use prescription drugs that have not been legally obtained or in a manner or for a purpose other than as prescribed. (However, nothing in this policy precludes the appropriate use of legally prescribed medications.) 
(4)  Violations of this policy are subject to disciplinary action up to and including terminations. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-62. - Supervisors' responsibility. 
It is the responsibility of the county's supervisors to counsel employees whenever they see changes in performance or behavior that suggest an employee has a drug problem. Although it is not the supervisor's job to diagnose personal problems, the supervisor should encourage such employees to seek help and advise them about available resources for getting help. Everyone shares responsibility for maintaining a safe work environment, and coworkers should encourage anyone who has a drug problem to seek help. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-63. - Goal, intent. 
The goal of this policy is to balance our respect for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive and drug-free environment. The intent of this policy is to offer a helping hand to those who need it, while sending a clear message that the illegal use of drugs and the abuse of alcohol are incompatible with employment in the county. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-64. - Resource information. 
The county offers resource information on various means of employee assistance in the community, including but not limited to drug and alcohol abuse programs. Employees are encouraged to use this resource file, which is located in the human resources department in the county administration building. In addition, the county will distribute this information to employees for their confidential use. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-65. - General procedures. 
(a)  An employee reporting to work visibly impaired will be deemed unable to properly perform required duties and will not be allowed to work. If possible, the employee's supervisor will first seek another supervisor's opinion to confirm the employee's status. Next, the supervisor will consult privately with the employee to determine the cause of the observation, including whether substance abuse has occurred. If, in the opinion of the supervisor, the employee is considered impaired, the employee will be sent home or to a medical facility by taxi or other safe transportation alternative, depending on the determination of the observed impairment, and accompanied by the supervisor or another employee if necessary. A drug test may be in order. An impaired employee will not be allowed to drive. 
(b)  Employees and job applicants who have a positive confirmed test result may explain or contest the result to the county within five (5) working days after the county contacts the employee or job applicant and shows him/her the positive test result as it was received from the laboratory in writing. 
(c)  The confidentiality of any information received by the employer through a substance abuse testing program shall be maintained, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-66. - Job applicant testing. 
(a)  All job applicants at the county will undergo testing for the presence of illegal drugs as a condition of employment. Any applicant with a confirmed positive test will be denied employment. 
(b)  Applicants will be required to submit voluntarily to a urinalysis test at a laboratory chosen by the county, and by signing a consent agreement will release the county from liability. 
(c)  If the physician, official or lab personnel has reasonable suspicion to believe that the job applicant has tampered with the specimen, the applicant will not be considered for employment. 
(d)  The county will not discriminate against applicants for employment because of a past history of drug abuse. It is the current abuse of drugs, preventing employees from performing their jobs properly, that the county will not tolerate. 
(e)  Individuals who have failed a preemployment test may initiate another inquiry with the county after a period of not shorter than six (6) months; but they must present themselves drug-free as demonstrated by urinalysis or other test selected by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-67. - Notification to county of criminal violation. 
As a condition of employment, employees must abide by the terms of this policy and must notify the county in writing of any conviction of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace no later than five (5) calendar days after such conviction. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Sec. 10-68. - Employee testing. 
(a)  The county has adopted testing practices to identify employees who use illegal drugs on or off the job. It shall be a condition of employment for all employees to submit to drug testing under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When there is reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is using illegal drugs. The following circumstances could cause reasonable suspicion: 
a.  Observed drug use. 
b.  Abnormal conduct or erratic behavior. 
c.  Apparent physical state of impairment. 
d.  Accidents or other actions that provide reasonable cause to believe the employee may be under the influence of drugs. 
e.  Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the county's premises or while operating the county's vehicle, machinery or equipment. 
f.  Evidence that an individual has tampered with any substance abuse test during his or her employment with the county. 
(2)  When employees have caused or contributed to an on-the-job injury that resulted in a loss of work time, which means any period of time during which an employee stops performing the normal duties of employment and leaves the place of employment to seek care from a licensed medical provider. The county may send employees for a substance abuse test if they are involved in on-the-job accidents where personal injury or damage to county property occurs. 
(3)  As part of a followup program to treatment for drug abuse. 
(4)  When a substance abuse test is conducted as part of a routinely scheduled employee fitness-for-duty medical examination that is part of the county's established policy or that is scheduled routinely for all members of an employment classification or group. 
(b)  Employees with a confirmed positive test result may, at their option and expense, have a second confirmation test made on the same specimen. An employee will not be allowed to submit another specimen for testing. 
(c)  If the physician, official or lab personnel has reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has tampered with the specimen, the employee is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Ord. of 4-16-96) 
Secs. 10-69—10-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION RETURN TO WORK POLICY 

Sec. 10-80. - Policy established. 
It is the policy of Gordon County to provide and establish a return to work policy and procedure for employees with work-related injuries and illnesses who are unable, temporarily and permanently, to return to their permanent job duties. 
Because Gordon County recognizes that their employees are a valued and limited resource, this program is designed to: 
(a)  Assist the medical recovery process by providing a focus and a goal for return of the injured employee. 
(b)  Benefit employees by allowing them to return to full wages as soon as possible. 
(c)  Benefit employer by reducing workers' compensation costs. 
The workers' compensation return to work policy will be adopted and added to the Gordon County Safety Ordinance. 
(Mo. of 8-20-02) 
Chapter 11 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 4; roads and highways, Ch. 12; signs, Ch. 13; soil erosion and sedimentation, Ch. 14; wastewater, Ch. 17. 
State Constitution reference— Development authorities, Art. IX, § VI, Par. III. 
State Law reference— Clearance, rehabilitation, etc., of blighted areas, O.C.G.A. § 8-4-1 et seq.; permit to disturb burial place in course of land development, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; conduct of directors and members of downtown development authorities, etc., O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-1; resource recovery development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; state department of community affairs, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; department of community affairs, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Designation as redevelopment area. 
The county is hereby designated as a redevelopment area under the provisions of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965, as amended, and further the District O.E.D.P. is adopted as the county plan, in lieu of submitting an area O.E.D.P. for the county. 
(Res. of 1-4-77) 
Sec. 11-2. - Development authority. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority, as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.), to function in the county, for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county and thereby promoting the general welfare of the state. 
(b)  There is hereby activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Gordon County" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) and particularly O.C.G.A. § 36-62-4. 
(c)  The board of directors appointed as provided by law shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) as it now exists and as it may hereafter be amended or modified. 
(d)  At the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall be so appointed. 
(Res. of 4-24-75) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Secs. 11-3—11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, repealed article II, sections 11-26—11-100, in its entirety, which pertained to planning commission and derived from a resolution of July 9, 1957; a motion of June 2, 1987; a motion of January 5, 1988; a resolution of May 17, 1988; a motion of July 7, 1998; an ordinance of December 5, 2000. For current provisions relating to planning commission, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-26—11-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, repealed article III, sections 11-101—11-200, in its entirety, which pertained to development regulations and derived from an ordinance of April 15, 1997; an ordinance of November 18, 2003; an ordinance of February 17, 2004. For current provisions relating to development regulations, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-101—11-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, repealed article IV, sections 11-201—11-250, in its entirety, which pertained to groundwater recharge area protection and derived from an ordinance of September 15, 1998 and an ordinance of April 17, 2001. For current provisions relating to groundwater recharge area protection, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-201—11-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, repealed article V, sections 11-251—11-300, in its entirety, which pertained to river corridor protection and derived from an ordinance of October 20, 1998. For current provisions relating to river corridor protection, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-251—11-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, repealed article VI, sections 11-301—11-350, in its entirety, which pertained to water supply watershed protection and derived from an ordinance of September 15, 1998. For current provisions relating to water supply watershed protection, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-301—11-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 2008, § C., repealed article VII, sections 11-351—11-386, in its entirety, which pertained to wetland protection and derived from an ordinance of September 15, 1998. For current provisions relating to wetland protection, the user's attention is directed to the Unified Land Development Code. 

Secs. 11-351—11-386. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-387. - Purposes of historic preservation commission. 
(a)  To support and further the belief that the Civil War and other historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of Gordon County, Georgia are among its most valued and important assets, and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, education, prosperity, and general welfare of the people; 
(b)  To protect and enhance local Civil War, historical, and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate the business environment within Gordon County; 
(c)  To enhance all opportunities for federal or state tax benefits pursuant to relevant provisions of federal or state law; 
(d)  To provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts, and to participate in federal, state, local, or private programs to do the same. 
(e)  To establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special Civil War or other historical, archaeological, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 1) 
Sec. 11-388. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings for purposes of this article only, unless otherwise provided: 
Building - A structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or the like. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness - A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features - The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features — All of those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property, including any Civil War defense work of any type or design, and archaeological resources. 
Historic district - A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established herein. 
Historic property - An individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by Gordon County Board of Commissioners as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established herein. 
Material change in appearance - A change which would affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature, or archaeological resource within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including military defense works of any kind, walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object - A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site - The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure - Although often synonymous with "building," the term also denotes construction not designed to shelter human activities, such as bridges or fountains. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 2) 
Secs. 11-389—11-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 11-411. - Title. 
There is hereby established a commission or board, the title for which shall be the Gordon County Historic Preservation Commission (hereinafter "HPC.") 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 3) 
Sec. 11-412. - Number, appointment, and qualifications. 
The HPC shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. All members shall be residents of Gordon County and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, military history, archaeology, planting, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available within Gordon County, as many members as practicable should be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of history, military history, archaeology, planning, architecture, historic preservation, or related professions. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 4) 
Sec. 11-413. - Terms. 
Members of the HPC shall serve at the pleasure of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, generally serving three-year terms. Members may serve subsequent additional three-year terms at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Gordon County, Georgia. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be two (2) members for one (1) year, two (2) members for two (2) years, and one (1) member for three (3) years. Members shall not receive a salary, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 5; Ord. of 4-19-16(1)) 
Sec. 11-414. - Powers. 
The HPC shall be authorized to: 
(a)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all areas within Gordon County having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(b)  Recommend to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(c)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions contained herein; 
(d)  Recommend to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(e)  Restore or preserve any historic properties otherwise acquired by Gordon County; 
(f)  Promote the acquisition by Gordon County of conservation easements and facade easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easement Act of 1976," O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
(g)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within Gordon County and on general historic preservation activities; 
(h)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources, archaeologists, military historians, and historic preservation experts, as the HPC may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(h)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(i)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, or its successor, a listing of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(j)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Gordon County historic preservation program; 
(k)  Employ, as necessary and as approved by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, persons with such professional skills, such as engineering or architecture, as needed to carry out the responsibilities of the HPC; 
(l)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic properties and acquire and sell historic properties, all in the name of Gordon County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. The HPC shall not take any action which may be construed as obligating Gordon County without prior consent of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners; 
(m)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(n)  Participate in and/or conduct private, state, and federal historic preservation programs. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 6) 
Sec. 11-415. - By-laws of the historic preservation commission. 
The HPC shall adopt by-laws for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness. The HPC shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment hereto. The HPC shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The HPC shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority three (3) of the members. The Gordon County attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the HPC except in the instance of a conflict of interest with respect to a particular matter, in which case Gordon County may retain independent counsel to the extent requested by the HPC to assist the HPC with its legal representation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 7) 
Sec. 11-416. - Conflict of interest. 
The members of the HPC shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws pursuant to Georgia law and/or the Gordon County Code of Ordinances, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 8) 
Sec. 11-417. - Recordation of meetings. 
An audio recording shall be made of all HPC proceedings and the secretary of the HPC shall keep written record of the HPC's resolutions, proceedings, correspondence, and actions. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 9) 
Secs. 11-418—11-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SITES, PROPERTIES, AND DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-441. - Survey of local historic resources. 
The HPC shall compile, and thereafter maintain, information to identify as many historic resources within Gordon County as may be practicable. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 15) 
Sec. 22-442. - Recommendation of sites. 
The HPC shall present, from time to time, to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, its recommendations for designation of historic sites, properties, and districts. Prior to the HPC's recommendation of a historic site, property, or district, to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners for designation, the HPC shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
(a)  A physical description; 
(b)  A statement of the historical, military, archaeological, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(c)  A map showing site, property, or district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, non-historic, intrusive) of individual resources therein; 
(d)  A statement justifying site, property, or district boundaries; and 
(e)  Representative photographs. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 16) 
Sec. 11-443. - Designation criteria for historic sites, properties, and districts. 
A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
(a)  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(b)  Represents one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture, landscape features, or military fortifications typical of one or more eras in the history of the county, state, or region; or is the location of archaeological resources; and 
(c)  By reason of such factors, constitutes a definable section of Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 17) 
Sec. 11-444. - Boundaries of a historic site, district, or property. 
Boundaries of a historic site, district, or property shall be included in designation ordinance(s), and shall thereafter be appropriately reflected upon the Official Zoning Map of Gordon County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 18) 
Sec. 11-445. - Evaluation of resources within historic districts. 
Individual resources within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(a)  Historic (contributes to the district;) 
(b)  Non-historic (does not contribute but does not detract from the district;) and 
(c)  Intrusive (detracts from the district.) 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 19) 
Sec. 11-446. - Designation of a historic site or property. 
A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to Gordon County, to the State of Georgia, or to the United States for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(b)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural or military fortification type or style; 
(c)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to Gordon County, the State of Georgia, or the region; or 
(d)  It is a site of archaeological, natural, or aesthetic interest that contributes to the cultural or historical development and heritage of Gordon County, the State of Georgia, or the United States. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 20) 
Sec. 11-447. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property—Who may apply. 
Designations  may be proposed by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, by any member of the HPC, by any local historical society, by any organized neighborhood association, or by any group of interested property owners. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 21) 
Sec. 11-448. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property—Required public hearing. 
The HPC and the Gordon County Board of Commissioners shall jointly hold a public hearing upon any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least three (3) times in the Calhoun Times Newspaper, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the HPC to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax rolls and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 22) 
Sec. 11-449. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property —Notification to DNR. 
Not less than thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation upon any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the HPC shall submit its report for nomination, as set forth herein above, to the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 23) 
Sec. 11-450. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property —Recommendation by HPC. 
A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the HPC within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 24) 
Sec. 11-451. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property —Action by Gordon County Board of Commissioners. 
Following receipt of the HPC's recommendation, the Gordon County Board of Commissioners may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or deny the ordinance with respect to designation of any property, site, or district as historic. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 25) 
Sec. 11-452. - Requirements for the designation of a historic site or property —Components of designation. 
Any ordinance by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners designating any property, site, or district as historic shall: 
(a)  List each property in the proposed historic district, describe the district proposed for designation, and specify the boundaries of the proposed district sufficient for GIS purposes; 
(b)  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
(c)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the HPC prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(d)  Require that any such property or district be designated and shown upon the Official Zoning Map of Gordon County, Georgia and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 26) 
Sec. 11-452. - Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. 
Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of any ordinance for designation by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to last known owner of the property shown on the Gordon County tax rolls and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 27) 
Sec. 11-453. - Notification of other agencies regarding designation. 
The HPC shall notify all necessary public agencies within Gordon County of any ordinance for designation. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 28) 
Sec. 11-454. - Moratorium upon applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. 
If an ordinance for designation is then under consideration, the HPC shall have the authority to maintain the current status quo with respect to the involved property. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 29) 
Secs. 11-455—11-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 11-476. - Certificate of appropriateness required for material changes in appearance. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a historic or non-historic building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made, or shall be permitted to be made, by the owner or occupant thereof, unless and until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the HPC. No grading or building permit shall be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 35) 
Sec. 11-477. - Exemptions for government and quasi-government agencies. 
The Georgia Department of Transportation, including, but not limited to its contractors, including Gordon County and its cities, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from the requirement to obtain a certificate of appropriateness. Likewise, qualified local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness, provided that such local government shall notify the HPC not less than forty-five (45) days prior to commencing any project which would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness, and so as to allow the HPC an opportunity to comment or to suggest ameliorative actions. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 36) 
Sec. 11-478. - Application to HPC. 
Any application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation, along with other documents as reasonably required by the HPC, and as further set forth upon the application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 37) 
Sec. 11-479. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the HPC shall not consider interior arrangement or use which shall have no effect upon exterior architectural, archaeological, or environmental features. Interior arrangements which shall affect the exterior shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 40) 
Sec. 11-480. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. 
The HPC shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is brought before the HPC. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the Calhoun Times not less than fifteen (15) nor more than forty-five (45) days prior to such hearing and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the HPC to all owners of any properties likely to be materially affected by the application. The HPC shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing and, in the discretion of the chairman of HPC, such other persons as the HPC deems advisable in assisting it to gain information. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 41) 
Sec. 11-481. - Action upon request for certificate of appropriateness. 
The HPC may, after the conclusion of the public hearing, approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications or conditions it deems necessary, or deny it. The HPC shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the historical, archaeological, architectural or aesthetic significance and value of the historic property, site, or district. In making this determination, the HPC shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
Reconstruction, Alteration, New Construction or Renovation: The HPC shall issue certificate of appropriateness for the above proposed actions, if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, incorporated herein by reference, and the commission's Guide for Protecting Civil War Battlefield Sites and Features. 
Relocation: A decision by the HPC approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
(a)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
(b)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
(c)  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
(d)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
Demolition: A decision by the HPC approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
(a)  The historic, military, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
(b)  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
(c)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
(d)  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the county. 
(e)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
(f)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse. 
(g)  Whether the building, structure, site, or object prevents the earning of reasonable economic return on the property on which it is located. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 42) 
Sec. 11-482. - Undue hardship. 
When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision hereof would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the HPC, in passing upon an application, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided that such variances, modifications or interpretations remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural, archaeological, or historical integrity, or character of the property be conserved, and substantial justice done. In granting a variance, the HPC may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose hereof. A situation created by the applicant cannot constitute an undue hardship. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 43) 
Sec. 11-483. - Time for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
The HPC shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building, structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the HPC. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the HPC. Failure of the HPC to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 44) 
Sec. 11-484. - Action to be taken by HPC upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
In the event the HPC rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The HPC may or may not suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application as submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application not sooner than three (3) months after denial thereof. In cases where the application involves a threat to archaeological resources or a material change in the appearance of an exterior architectural or environmental feature which would require the issuance of a grading or building permit, the HPC shall notify the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing grading or building permits in writing, and the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the HPC shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing grading or building permits and, in such a case, no grading or building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 45) 
Sec. 11-485. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work performed is not in accordance with such certificate, or in violation of a denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the HPC shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. The Gordon County Board of Commissioners or the HPC shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic site, property, or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic site, property, or historic district. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 46) 
Sec. 11-486. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 47) 
Sec. 11-487. - Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
The HPC shall keep a public record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness, and of all the HPC's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 48) 
Sec. 11-488. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the HPC relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness and desiring to appeal further must do so by Writ of Certiorari directly to the Gordon County Superior Court within thirty (30) days of such adverse decision. There shall be no intermediate appeal to the Gordon County Board of Commissioners or to any other body. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 49) 
Secs. 11-489—11-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MAINTENANCE OF DESIGNATED PROPERTIES 

Sec. 11-511. - Routine maintenance or repair. 
Ordinary maintenance and/or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a designated property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and which does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 50) 
Sec. 11-512. - Failure to provide necessary maintenance or repair. 
Property owners of designated properties shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate as a result of a failure of the owner to provide necessary maintenance or repair. The HPC shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration and demolition by neglect: The HPC shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate or to be demolished by neglect. Any of the following shall constitute failure to provide necessary maintenance or repair: 
(a)  Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical support that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling. 
(b)  Deterioration of flooring or floor supports, roofs, or other horizontal members that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling. 
(c)  Deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 
(d)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars. 
(e)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(f)  Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering. 
(g)  Rotting, holes, and other forms of decay. 
(h)  Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, and architectural details that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling. 
(i)  Heaving, subsidence, or cracking of sidewalks, steps, or pathways. 
(j)  Deterioration of fences, gates, and accessory structures. 
(k)  Deterioration that has a detrimental effect upon the special character of the district as a whole or the unique attributes and character of the historic resource. 
(l)  Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions to life, health, or other property. 
In the event the HPC shall determine a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the HPC will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. In the event that the condition is not remedied within thirty (30) days, the owner shall be subject to the penalty provisions hereof and, at the direction of the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration or demolition by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the HPC. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 51) 
Sec. 11-513. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as to exempt any person from full compliance with all Gordon County land development ordinances, including but not limited to the Gordon County Zoning Ordinance, the Gordon County Building Ordinance, and the Gordon County Development Ordinance, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 52) 
Secs. 11-514—11-535. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-536. - Penalties for violation. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b,) any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be sentenced to a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 55) 
Sec. 11-537. - Continuing violation. 
Any violation hereof shall be considered a continuing violation, subject to separate citation each day in which such violation remains. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 56) 
Sec. 11-538. - Remedies—Injunctive relief. 
When any condition or action violates any portion of this article, the HPC may seek injunctive or other equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy or penalty. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 57) 
Sec. 11-539. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this article require more restrictive standards than are required in or pursuant to any other statute, law, rule, or regulation, the requirements of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this article, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-3-05, § 58) 
Chapter 13 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 8; planning and development, Ch. 11; roads and highways, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising adjacent to state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SIGN ORDINANCE 

Sec. 13-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Gordon County Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § I) 
Sec. 13-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to provide for the regulation of outdoor advertising signs, which are erected on and visible from the road system of Gordon County, Georgia. A sign by its very nature is designed to draw an individual's attention to that sign. This characteristic makes signs a valuable medium of communication. However, this same characteristic can distract motorists and pedestrians and thus create traffic hazards. In addition, the clutter created by an excess in number, size and height of signs creates a distraction to travelers and negatively impacts the general appearance of an area. Signs lessen the aesthetic qualities of an area and intrude upon the residential character of an area. Therefore, signs must be regulated to insure that they are structurally safe and sound and free of all hazards and to limit the negative impact of signs while encouraging the positive and constructive uses of signs. 
The purposes of this article are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication within Gordon County; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and Gordon County's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to protect the public traveling along primary and interstate highways from distractions, from aesthetic desecration and from nuisances and all associated with the proliferation of signs in a concentrated area along said highways; to minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; to regulate signs by zoning district, size, height, location on a lot, number, methods of visitors and businesses within Gordon County. 
(b)  This article is not intended, and shall not be applied in any manner, to control the message or content of the message on any sign allowed under this article and the laws of the State of Georgia. This article is intended to regulate signs in the unincorporated areas of Gordon County while showing full deference to the right to engage in constitutionally protected speech. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability on Gordon County, its employees, agents, or officials which enforce or fail to enforce any of the provisions provided herein or any applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § II) 
Sec. 13-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Abandoned sign, on-premises: A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
Abandoned sign, off-premise: A sign in which advertises goods, products, services or facilities which are no longer available to the public or which directs persons to a former location where such goods, products, services or facilities are no longer available. 
Animated illumination or effects: Illumination or effects with action, motion, moving characters or flashing lights. This may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind-actuated devices. Specifically included is any motion picture or video mechanism used in conjunction with any outdoor advertising structure in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public right-of-way. This definition does not include signs which indicate only time and/or temperature provided that such time and/or temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than twelve (12) times in a minute or electronic message signs. 
Awning/canopy: A permanently installed cloth or canvas covering which hangs from a building facade or projects over the public walkway for beautification or shelter. Heretofore referred to as a canopy. 
Awning sign: A sign, symbol, trademark or other message written on an awning attached to a wall. Awning signs are included in the definition of wall signs. 
Banner: A display made of a pliable material displaying a commercial or noncommercial message which is secured or mounted so as to allow movement caused by the wind. 
Block out zone: An area that is measured from the intersecting points of a public right-of-way, street, road, highway, railroad, at any entrance into or exit from any public road or other location and extending twenty (20) feet along the right-of-way in each direction and closed so as to form a triangle in the corner created by the intersection. 
Buildable area of lot: That area of a lot within the building setback lines as set by the Gordon County Zoning Ordinance within which a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Building facade area: The height of the facade multiplied by the width of the facade equals the facade area. 
Building setback line: The minimum yard equipment adjacent to any public street or property line set by the Gordon County Zoning Ordinance beyond which no part of a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Bulletin board: A sign used to announce activities at any noncommercial place of public assembly. 
Bunting: A long colored strip of cloth or other pliable material used for festive decorations and containing no commercial or noncommercial message, logo, or emblem and must be attached to the structure. 
Canopy sign: A sign affixed to, imposed upon or painted on any permanent roof-like structure extending over a driveway or vehicle access area. Such signs may be mounted flush or suspended. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that continuous face with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from or beneath the canopy. 
Changeable copy sign (manual): A sign on which copy or sign panels may be changed manually in the field such as boards with the changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels. 
Commemorative: A sign which identifies a site of memorable public interest. 
Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying a building or construction site and the architects, engineers, financial institutions, contractors and suppliers involved. 
Directional: Providing instructions for travel to or indicating the location of a place or event, whether by words, arrows or other symbols. 
Electronic sign: A sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a commercial electronic variable message sign. 
Extended quadrant: Any one (1) of four (4) areas of land six hundred sixty (660) feet in width adjacent and contiguous to a quadrant (as defined hereinafter) and beginning at the point where the pavement widens on the interstate highway to accommodate the exit or entrance ramp in the quadrant and extending in the opposite direction of the traffic flow on that side of the interstate highway to the boundary of the city limits. 
Facade: The exterior surface or face of a building. The front facade is the building wall, which contains the primary entry of the building. The side facade means the exterior walls other than the main or front view. 
Flashing: Includes illumination which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. Excludes illuminated signs which indicate only time and/or temperature provided that such time/temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than twelve (12) times a minute. 
Freestanding sign: An on-premises self-contained sign which is wholly independent of any building or other structure, of a permanent nature; but not including any off-premises outdoor advertising sign, any canopy sign, any sign for a nonresidential use in a residential zone, any sign designated under no permit required. 
Height: The measure in linear feet from the highest point on the sign to the unaltered elevation of the ground at the base of the sign or directly beneath the sign. At the election of the permit holder, the height of a sign may be measured from the highest point on the sign to the level of the nearest road from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
Identification: A sign bearing only the names or addresses of occupants of the premises. 
Identification sign: A sign bearing only the names or addresses of occupants of the premises and bearing no commercial message other than that of the use identified. A sign which identifies a building name especially if the building is a site of a public or historical significance. 
Illuminated signs, direct: A sign designed to emit light. 
Illuminated signs, indirect: A sign on which light is cast from a source other than the display area. 
Includes: Denotes a partial definition. 
Inflatable advertising devices: Includes air or gas filled signs, figures or balloons used for advertising purposes. 
Instructional sign: A sign conveying instructions to the public, such as entrance, exit, open, closed, no trespassing, etc. Commercial messages, as part of the display area, are not allowed except for the use of the business name and/or logo. 
Interior sign: Signs intended to be viewed from the interior of a building. 
Interstate highway: I-75 and any road of the state highway system which is a portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways, as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the Georgia Department of Transportation pursuant to 23 U.S.C. section 103, or any limited access highway as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the Georgia Department of Transportation and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the provision of 23 U.S.C. section 103. 
Legal lot record: A lot which meets the legal requirements set forth for the applicable zoning district. 
Lot: Contiguous parcel(s) of land, legally platted and recorded as a legal lot of record, in single or common ownership, and not divided by a public street. 
Major thoroughfare: A street or highway having a right-of-way of sixty (60) feet or more. 
Noncommercial messages: By way of example, and without limitation, noncommercial messages include messages that identify or urge voter support for a political issue, political party or candidate; messages such as the announcement of a birth or birthday. By way of example, and without limitation, noncommercial messages exclude any message that advertises a product or service for sale; and any message that proposes a commercial transaction. 
Nonconforming sign: Any lawfully erected sign which, on the effective date of this article, fails to comply with the requirements of this article. 
Normal maintenance and repair: Normal maintenance and repair includes painting and cleaning. However, normal maintenance or repair conclusively does not include any structural alteration, any modification that requires a building permit or any alternation that costs in excess of fifty (50) percent of the value of the sign prior to such maintenance and repair. For purposes of this definition, the value of the sign as shown on the records of the tax assessor shall be presumed to be the replacement cost. If no amount appears in the records of the tax assessor for the individual sign, then the amount stated as the value of the sign on the original sign permit application shall be presumed to be the replacement cost. These presumptions of replacement costs may be rebutted by a county approved appraisal. 
Off-premises outdoor advertising sign: A sign which identifies, advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing not sold, offered or conducted on the lot where the sign is located or which may be sold, offered or conducted only incidentally, if at all, on the premises where this sign is located. This shall include those signs commonly referred to as billboards. For purposes of this article, "off-premises outdoor advertising sign" shall not include any sign not requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this article. 
On-premises sign: A sign which identifies, advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing which is the principal product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing sold, offered or conducted on the premises where the sign is located. "On-premises sign" shall be classified for the purposes of this article as canopy, freestanding, wall, residential subdivision/development signs and signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones. For purposes of this article, "on-premises sign" shall not include any sign requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this article. 
Owner: Includes any person having possession of or control of a sign or owner of record or real property. 
Permanent sign: Any sign attached to land or a building roof, wall, awning, canopy, etc., by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces, wood, etc., and has a valid sign permit. 
Permanent window sign: A sign with letters, words or symbols which are displayed on and permanently attached to the window glass or framework. 
Portable display sign: Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground, including signs mounted or designed to be mounted on a trailer-type frame or portable wood or metal frame. Portable display signs are not included in the definition of freestanding signs. 
Primary highway: Any road of the state highway system which is a portion of connected main highways, as officially designated by the Georgia Department of Transportation and approved by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to 23 U.S.C. section 103. 
Prohibited sign: Any sign, other than a legal nonconforming sign, not conforming to this article. 
Projecting signs: A sign which is attached perpendicular to a building and extends horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Public service information: Time, temperature, notice of public meetings, special events, road/traffic directional signs, etc. 
Quadrant: Any one (1) of four (4) land areas formed by the intersection of an interstate highway and any road, street, main thoroughfare or primary highway which has an entrance or exit ramp to or from said road, street, or primary highway to the interstate highway. A quadrant shall be quadrilateral (rhomboid) six hundred sixty (660) feet in width parallel to the outside edge of the exit or entrance ramp beginning at the point where the pavement widens to accommodate the exit or entrance ramp, proceeding with the traffic flow on that side of the interstate highway, and ending at the edge of the intersecting road, street or primary highway. 
Real estate marketing sign: A temporary real estate sign located at the entrance to a subdivision/real estate development that shows the name of the project or development, name and phone number of real estate agent or agency that is handling the listing or sales, price range, and hours of sales, and not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
Roof sign: A sign erected, constructed, or maintained above the roof of any building. The sign or copy area shall not extend beyond the pitch boundaries or extremities of the rooflines. The sign shall be mounted flush. Square footage to be calculated the same as wall signage and will be deducted from the allowable wall sign area. Permit applications shall be accompanied by a site plan, which shall be stamped by a registered engineer or architect as to dimensions, above requirements, and structural integrity. 
Sign area: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure. 
Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. 
Soffit sign: A sign which hangs or is suspended beneath the cover of a walkway or beneath a support extending from a building. 
Temporary sign: Includes but is not limited to banners, flags, streamers, and trailer signs. 
Visible: Means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Wall sign: An on-premises sign, including an awning sign, permanently attached to the exterior wall of a building. 
Window sign: A sign painted upon or affixed so as to be visible through a window. 
Zoning district: The zoning designation of parcels of land under the Gordon County Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § III) 
Sec. 13-4. - Prohibited signs. 
Any sign not specifically identified in this article as a permitted sign shall be prohibited. The following signs are prohibited in any zoning district in Gordon County: 
(a)  Banners except as specifically allowed under this article. 
(b)  Signs which produce noise or sounds capable of being heard even though the sounds produced are not understandable sounds. This provision does not prohibit radio transmissions used in conjunction with any sign. 
(c)  Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odors. 
(d)  Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees, utility poles or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(e)  Inflatable advertising devices except as specifically allowed under this article. 
(f)  Roadside bench, covered shelter or bus shelter advertising signs. 
(g)  Signs which depict nudity, sexual conduct, obscene or pornographic material as defined in the United States and or Georgia Codes. This article will in no way infringe upon any constitutional rights as defined by the State of Georgia and the U.S. Constitution. 
(h)  Roof signs except as otherwise allowed herein. 
(i)  Rotating signs (excludes barber pole signs). 
(j)  Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under the laws of Georgia, federal laws or regulations, or any ordinance of Gordon County. 
(k)  Signs or advertising devices attached to any vehicle or trailer parked so as to be visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity, except for a common carrier or other vehicle which is used for daily transportation with a valid license plate. Any allowable vehicle or common carrier having a sign attached thereto as a part of the operational structure of the vehicle is to be parked in a legal parking space belonging to the business or on the property to which the sign makes reference. No signs on trailers or other non-motorized vehicles will be allowed under this provision. 
(l)  Signs placed in parking spaces which are required to meet the minimum parking requirements. 
(m)  Signs not in good repair, specifically including any sign, which is in a state of disassembly or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view. 
(n)  Abandoned signs, which advertise an activity, business, product, or service no longer conducted or available. 
(o)  Commercial sign copy on litter receptacles, vending machines or like structures, except for copy indicating products sold, dispensed, or distributed from within the structure upon which the sign copy appears (e.g. sign copy on vending machines shall be permitted if restricted to products sold, dispensed or distributed from the machine). 
(p)  Twirling, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb-type signs, and portable display signs, shall be prohibited. 
(q)  No signs other than those belonging to local or state governments, public service agencies, railroads and the like shall be located in a public right-of-way. 
(r)  Trailer signs. Changeable copy signs designed to be transported periodically from place to place or designed to be supported on wheels, whether or not such wheels have been removed are prohibited except as specifically allowed under this article. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § IV) 
Sec. 13-5. - General regulations. 
(a)  What signs are covered. Unless specifically excluded herein, this article shall govern any sign erected, maintained or located in Gordon County. Signs wholly located within a structure or building and which are intended to be viewed from the interior of the building are not regulated by this article. 
(b)  Definitions and specific provisions. The names of sign types and other words have special meanings in this article. Consult the definitions section of this article and the other specific provisions to determine the meaning of words and the regulations that apply to each type of sign. 
(c)  Other laws still apply. All signs shall comply with all federal and state laws, and county ordinances, codes, and rules. Compliance with the terms of this article shall not operate to relieve any individual, corporation or other entity of any other duty imposed by law. 
(d)  Property rights of others must be respected. Issuance of a permit hereunder shall not serve to waive any applicable protective covenants or private rights of property ownership. 
(e)  Safety. At a minimum, no sign or other obstruction of vision, including but not limited to poles or other support structures, with a height greater than three (3) feet, shall be permitted within an area beginning at the intersection of any right-of-way lines of any streets, roads, highways, driveways, curb cuts or railroads, and extending twenty (20) feet along each such right-of-way, and closed by a straight line connecting the end points of the said twenty-foot sections of the right-of-way lines (block out zone). 
(f)  Signs shall not be similar to traffic control devices. No sign or illumination shall be used, constructed, maintained or located at any location where it may interfere with or obstruct the view of an authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle device or markings. 
(g)  Lights. Series, lines or rows of lights supported by cables or other physical means typically associated with auto sales lots shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the street or out of the right-of-way, whichever is the furthest from the street. 
(h)  Electrical and structural safety. All electrical signs and all electrical devices that illuminate signs or otherwise operate signs are subject to approval of the Gordon County Building Inspector or his designee. All such signs and electrical devices shall only be allowed if listed by an approved testing laboratory or agency and installed in conformance with that listing. All signs shall be built in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
(i)  Content of sign. This article shall not regulate the specific content of signs. Any sign, display or device allowed under this article may contain commercial or noncommercial copy unless otherwise specified herein, except that such copy shall not contain obscene or pornographic material or advertise an illegal activity. This article will in no way, infringe upon any person's constitutional rights. 
(j)  Expiration of permit. A sign permit for an on-premises sign shall expire six (6) months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign has not commenced within that time. A sign permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign is not completed within that time. If construction has not begun or been completed as required by this subsection, then a new application must be submitted and the permitting process commenced anew. 
(k)  Structural/safety. Any sign within this article attached to a building must meet the requirements of the Gordon County Building Code and any other applicable county ordinance(s). 
(l)  Setback. Unless a more restrictive setback is specified in conditions of zoning or in this article, all signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all property lines or twenty (20) feet from the edge of pavement if a street or road (excludes temporary flags and streamers). 
(m)  Signs attached to a building. No sign or canopy area shall extend beyond the pitch boundaries or extremities of the rooflines of the building to which the sign or sign structure is attached. Any sign shall either be considered a roof sign or a wall sign depending on its location and must comply with the regulations pertaining to said signs allowed under this article (excludes flags; see subsection 13-6(9) and (10). 
(n)  Changeable copy signs (manual). Such signs shall be allowed only as an addition to, or in conjunction with, a permitted freestanding sign and must be permanently affixed to said sign. Changeable copy signs shall not be allowed to stand alone. Such signs shall be deducted from allocated freestanding sign area. 
(o)  Clearance from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located not less than twelve (12) feet horizontally or thirteen (13) feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts. Signs located in the vicinity of electrical conductors energized with less than seven hundred fifty (750) volts shall maintain clearances in accordance with the National Electric Safety Code. Copies of said code are on file with the building inspector. In no case shall a sign be installed closer than thirty-six (36) inches from any electrical conductor or public utility guy wire. 
(p)  Directional signs. Off-site directional signs of a quasi-public nature which state the name or location of a hospital, community center, private school, college, youth organization, church, or other place of worship, or the name or place of meeting of an official or civic body shall be allowed with a permit. Maximum height of said signs shall be six (6) feet and said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area (no permit fee shall be required). 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § V) 
Sec. 13-6. - Signs which do not require a permit. 
(a)  The following operations shall not be considered as creating a new sign, and therefore, shall not require a sign permit: 
(1)  The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign, billboard, theater marquee or similar approved sign which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
(2)  The changing of the tenant panels on a free-standing multi-use tenant board. 
(3)  Normal maintenance or repair of an approved sign or sign structure. 
(b)  No sign permit shall be required for any of the following signs to be displayed in any zoning district; provided, however, that all other applicable regulations shall apply to such signs and that no such sign in a residential zoning district shall be illuminated: 
(1)  Official government signs: Signs of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority or entity in its exercise of power of eminent domain, including but not limited to traffic signs, signals or similar regulatory devices or warnings, official flags, emblems, official public notices, official instruments, signs of historical interest or other similar signs or devices. 
(2)  Parking area signs: Signs identifying parking areas in commercial lots, so long as the primary purpose of the signs is to facilitate parking. No commercial message of any kind, except the name of a center, may be displayed and no signs [shall] exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height. 
(3)  Entrance/exit signs: Signs erected for the purpose of giving directions or instructions into and from the property; however, no such sign shall exceed three (3) feet in height above the pavement and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. No such sign shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the public right-of-way and shall contain no advertising displays and shall not obstruct sight distance from driveways. 
(4)  Banners: One (1) exterior banner not to exceed thirty (30) square feet in area shall be allowed at each place of business and shall be securely attached to the facade of the building. 
(5)  Streamers: Steamers or pennants shall be setback at least twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the street or out of the right-of-way, whichever is farthest from the street and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
(6)  Construction related signs: Signs placed upon a site under construction, alternation or removal denoting the name of the project under construction, the bank, the architect, engineer or contractor involved; provided, however, that such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area in residential districts or thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area in other zoning districts and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. All signs shall be removed from the site within seven (7) days after final inspection or completion or abandonment of the project. 
(7)  Noncommercial signs: In addition to the display of commercial copy as specifically allowed under this article, noncommercial signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less are allowed without a permit. 
(8)  Special event or seasonal signs: Sign displays that include any message, insignia, or depiction traditionally associated with the holiday or event celebrated or observed, including state, national or international events. 
Policy statement: It is envisioned that depictions traditionally associated with a holiday be allowed. These include, by way of example and not by limitation, Santa Claus, nativity scenes, menorah, Easter bunnies, pumpkins, "Happy New Year" flags and Fourth of July celebrations as more completely defined within the [definitions] under noncommercial messages. However, no commercial message or copy shall be permitted in conjunction with an allowed seasonal or special event sign or display. Each allowed special event or seasonal display may continue for a thirty-day period in any one (1) year, except: Thanksgiving through New Year's season, when a sixty-day period of display will be allowed; and seasonal displays may include signs, banners, bunting, lighting and ornamental objects which would not ordinarily be allowed under this article. 
(9)  Official flags or insignias: Official flags or insignias of the United States, the State of Georgia or any other nation, state or government and nonprofit organizations. Such flags or insignias shall be flown in compliance with the standards applicable under state and/or federal law. 
(10)  Nonofficial or logotype flags: Nonofficial flags used primarily for commercial advertising purposes shall not exceed five (5) feet in height when erected on the roof of a building and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height when erected on the ground. Such flags when erected on the ground shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the street or out of the right-of-way, whichever is farthest from the street. Nonofficial flags used primarily for commercial advertising shall not display words, messages or advertising copy. One (1) logotype flag for industries shall be allowed at each main entrance to the building, erected on flagpole, for the purpose of displaying the name or logo of the industry. Logotype flag for industries shall be allowed at each main entrance to the building, erected on a flagpole, for the purpose of displaying the name or logo of the industry. Logotype flags are not allowed to be displayed at restaurants or retail establishments. 
(11)  Occupational and professional signs: Wall mounted or soffit-type name plates or signs denoting only name, address, telephone number and occupation or profession. Such signs shall be attached to buildings, shall be limited to one (1) per tenant or subdivided occupant, and shall not exceed three (3) square feet. 
(12)  Architecture: Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures. 
(13)  Memorials: Memorial signs or tablets, including, but not limited to, building cornerstones and other similar signs which indicate the names of buildings, dates of erection, or other historical data. 
(14)  Temporary window displays: Temporary window displays of merchandise sold on-premises. 
(15)  Scoreboards: Scoreboards on athletic fields, including advertising on school athletic fields, fences or walls. 
(16)  Real estate signs: Signs advertising the lease or sale of the property on which the sign is located are allowed without a permit. In all zoning districts signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. One (1) sign is allowed for each complete two hundred (200) feet of lot's frontage along any one (1) public road. All real estate signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale or lease of the last property advertised. 
(17)  No trespassing signs: Not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, placed near property lines, identifying private property or instructing the public not to enter. 
(18)  Warning or regulatory signs: Such as danger, no hunting, no smoking, no dumping, etc. In all zoning districts signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
(19)  Gas pumps/vending machines: Signs forming an integral part of a gasoline pump, service appliance, or vending machine. 
(20)  Interior signs: Signs intended to be viewed from the interior of the building. 
(21)  Political signs: Signs whereby the public is to be informed regarding a specific political event or candidate(s) or issue(s). 
a.  Political signs shall be located a minimum of one (1) foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians, and must be with proper authorization of the property owner(s). 
b.  Political signs shall be limited to a copy area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; however, this shall not be deemed to disallow the use of general outdoor advertising signs. 
c.  Political signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
d.  Prior to removal of signs in violation, except for signs on the right-of-way or those signs creating a traffic or safety hazard, (whether erector or user) shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice to remedy their violation. 
e.  Political candidates shall be responsible for removal of the political signs within seven (7) days of the election. 
(22)  Weekend directional signs (WEDS) findings and purposes: Many people travel to, from and through Gordon County on a daily basis. During weekday "rush hours" when the majority of people on the roads are commuting to or from work, roads are often nearly beyond their capacity. Traffic hazards and distractions must be minimized. However, people at times need the benefit of directional signs to help them find their destinations. Properly regulated, such directional signs may actually aid the flow of traffic. The following regulations recognize the difference in weekday and weekend traffic and are intended to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents, visitors and businesses of Gordon County. 
a.  Definition: WEDS shall covey directions to a specific, noncommercial place or event. For example: To premises that are for sale or lease, to a church or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales, estate sales, etc. 
b.  Zoning districts: WEDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
c.  Time allowed: WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to remove all WEDS prior to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. 
d.  No permit required: WEDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. 
e.  Construction: WEDS shall not exceed four (4) square feet of sign area and three (3) feet in height and may be double-faced. WEDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. WEDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, street light poles, utility poles, other signs, or other sign structures. WEDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
f.  Location: There shall be only one (1) WEDS for any given place, activity, or event per three hundred (300) feet of road frontage. No WEDS shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the right-of-way. All WEDS must be placed on private property with the property owner's permission. 
(23)  Garage sale: Garage sale or similar signs, provided such signs are located out of the right-of-way and on private property with the owner's consent. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § VI) 
Sec. 13-7. - Free standing on-premises signs. 
All signs under this section require a permit. Free standing on-premises signs in all zoning districts shall comply with the following: 
(a)  One (1), maximum twenty-five (25) square foot, free standing sign not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in height shall be permitted for each street on which the lot has frontage (excludes lots along U.S. Highway 41 also known as South Wall Street and North Wall Street, State Route 53 and Spur 53, State Route 136, State Route 156, State Route 225 and I-75 and lots in the zoning districts R-1, R2, R-3 and O-I). 
(b)  Lots (excluding properties within the residential zoning districts of R-1, R-2, R-3, and O-I) fronting U.S. Highway 41 also known as South Wall Street and North Wall Street, State Route 53 and Spur 53, State Route 136, State Route 156, State Route 225 and I-75, shall be allowed one (1), maximum one hundred twenty (120) square foot, free standing sign for each frontage on said highways, not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
(c)  Location: If a lot has more than one (1) street frontage and a free standing sign is proposed on each street, then the free standing sign allowed on each frontage can be no closer to the intersection of said streets than half the distance of the frontage on each street. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § VII) 
Sec. 13-8. - Wall signs, canopy signs, awning signs. 
All signs under this section require a permit. Wall signs, canopy signs and awning signs in all zoning districts except residential shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Wall signs shall have an aggregate area not exceeding one five-tenths (1.5) square feet for each linear foot of building face parallel to a street lot line, or ten (10) percent of the wall area to which it attached, whichever is less, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) square feet. Where a lot fronts on more than one (1) street, the aggregate sign area facing each street frontage shall be calculated separately. Canopy and awning signs shall be deducted from allocated wall sign area. 
(b)  Height: No wall sign that projects more than four (4) inches from the building surface on which it is attached shall be less than eight (8) feet above the finished elevation at its lowest extremity. A wall sign shall not project above the vertical wall to which it is attached. 
(c)  Wall, canopy or awning signs shall not have changeable copy unless approved as a marquee sign. 
(d)  Marquee wall signs may be substituted for wail signs for uses as approved such as theaters and hotels where their use is customary. Such signs shall not extend above the rooflines of the building nor extend more than two (2) feet from the face of the building upon which is secured. Allowable sign dimensions shall be the same as for wall signs. 
(e)  No wall sign shall project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the building surface on which it is attached. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § VIII) 
Sec. 13-9. - Grand opening signs. 
Businesses and institutions may exhibit banners, flags, balloons, streamers, air or gas filled figures within three (3) months of starting the operation of a new business. Such signs may be exhibited for no more than one (1), thirty-day period per new location or branch facility. Additionally, one (1) "Coming Soon" sign announcing a grand opening may be displayed beginning no more than sixty (60) days prior to such opening and continuing for fourteen (14) days after the opening as long as the sign does not exceed the maximum permitted size for a primary sign in the applicable district. A temporary permit is required. The fee for a temporary permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall be issued one (1) time only. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § IX) 
Sec. 13-10. - Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. 
Off-premises outdoor advertising signs require a permit. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs are allowed in developed commercial and industrial zoning districts only and shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Off-premises signs shall be allowed a maximum sign area of six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet. 
(b)  Off-premises signs shall not exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet (excluding properties in a quadrant or extended quadrant). 
(c)  Off-premises signs shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way of a public street, or highway, and twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines and buildings on the site. 
(d)  Off-premises signs shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from the residential zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3 and O-I. 
(e)  Off-premises signs shall be minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from all other off-premises signs (excluding properties in a quadrant or extended quadrant) on the same side of the primary highway or major thoroughfare. 
(f)  Illumination of off-premises signs shall not be direct. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting including but not limited to neon, animation, and running or flashing lights are prohibited. 
(g)  Only freestanding off-premises signs are allowed. Off-premises advertising signs are not allowed to be attached to or painted on any building or any other natural or manmade structure or object other than the supporting structure specifically built said sign. 
(h)  Off-premises signs visible from or located along the main traveled way of Interstate Highway 75 will only be located in a quadrant or within an extended quadrant only in an area two thousand thirty-five (2,035) feet long beginning five hundred (500) feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way in the contiguous quadrant to accommodate the exit or the entrance ramp. No more than four (4) off-premises signs shall exceed seventy (70) feet in height and may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another off-premises sign when the signs are separated by a building or other obstruction so that only one (1) sign face located within the five hundred-foot zone is visible from Interstate Highway 75 at any time. 
(i)  Off-premises outdoor advertising signs legally existing on the effective date of this article may be continued, even though such signs do not conform to this provision. Such nonconforming signs shall not be expanded, relocated, or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution of the interchangeable poster panels, painted boards, or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be allowed. 
(j)  No such nonconforming sign shall continue after the discontinuance of the nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § X) 
Sec. 13-11. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of this article, which do not conform to provisions of this article shall be deemed to be legal nonconforming "grand fathered" signs and may remain, except as otherwise specifically qualified in this aritcle. Such signs shall not be enlarged, extended, structurally reconstructed, replaced or altered in any manner; except a sign face may be changed so long as the new sign face does not increase either height or sign area. This provision shall not have the effect of excusing any violation of any other article. Nor shall this provision have the effect of permitting the continued existence of any unsafe sign or any sign that is not in good state of repair. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. No repairs other than minor maintenance and upkeep of nonconforming [signs] shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. A nonconforming sign which has been declared by the building official of Gordon County to be unsafe because of its physical condition shall not be repaired, rebuilt or restored unless such repair or restoration will result in a sign which conforms to all applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign shall not be moved for any distance on the same lot or to another lot unless such change in location will make the sign conform to the provisions of this article, and meet permit requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a nonconforming sign is removed or discontinued for any period of time, except for maintenance, the subsequent erection of a sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A nonconforming sign which is changed to or replaced by a conforming sign shall no longer be deemed nonconforming, and thereafter such sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  When a nonconforming sign is destroyed or toppled by an act of God, weather, or whatever other means, this shall not constitute a sufficient reason for grant of variance to re-erect the nonconforming sign. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XI) 
Sec. 13-12. - Interpretation, construction and severability. 
(a)  Interpretation. The words used in this article in the present tense shall include the future. Singular words include the plural, and plural words include the singular. For the sake of brevity, masculine and feminine pronouns shall be mutually inclusive and shall also include the neuter (i.e. corporations). Subheadings and/or examples are inserted for the convenience of the reader and shall not operate to limit the effect of any provision. 
(b)  Construction. The provisions of all other applicable county ordinances and state and federal laws shall apply. This article shall not be construed to create a right to maintain a sign in violation of any other law, in violation of any protective covenant or in violation of the property rights or other rights of any person or entity. In the event that any provision of this article regulates the same activity, conduct or any aspect of signage that is also regulated by county, state or federal law, then provision of this article is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
(c)  Severability. The provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases and terms of this article are severable. In the event that any portion or any specific application of this article is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not effect the other portions or other applications of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XII) 
Sec. 13-13. - Permits generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no sign shall be used, constructed, maintained, located, replaced, expanded or relocated unless a sign permit has been issued by Gordon County. 
(b)  A new sign permit shall be required for any structural alterations, other than normal maintenance and repair as defined in this article. 
(c)  No permit issued for a sign under the provisions of this article, shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain any sign that violates any provision of this article, any other ordinance, state law or federal law. 
(d)  Any sign requiring a permit for which a permit has not been secured shall be removed immediately. Removal shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the sign owner, the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XIII) 
Sec. 13-14. - Permit application. 
(a)  Who may apply. Permits shall be issued only to: 
(1)  The owner of the real property where the sign is to be located; 
(2)  A lessee who has the right to install or maintain a sign on the real property where the sign is to be located; or 
(3)  The erector of the sign. 
An applicant that is a lessee shall produce a copy of the lease or a written statement from the owner of the real property that the applicant has the right to maintain a sign on the property. A sign erector shall produce a copy of a current business license and proof of insurance or bond as required by the bond and insurance section of this article. Application may be made by the owner, lessee or agent of the owner or lessee. 
(b)  Application. Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the county on forms furnished by the county. The application for a permit shall contain the identification and address of the property on which the sign is to be erected; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the sign owner, sign erector, property owner, lessee (if applicable) and the agent making the application (if applicable); the type of sign as classified by this article; and such other pertinent information as the county may require to insure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances of the county. The county may require that the application be accompanied by two (2) copies of the following: site plans showing location of structures upon the property on which the sign is to be located and the location of the sign in relation to the structures, property lines, public rights-of-way, and other signs; plans, specifications and structural details showing the type and manner of construction, attachment to buildings or in ground erection; and a visual representation of the completed sign. The county may require said plans to bear the representation of the completed sign. The county may require said plans to bear the signature and seal of a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, architect or land planner. Each application shall include a signed statement from the landowner or possessor of the property giving consent to entry into the property for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this article. If classification of the road on which the property fronts is of importance to the permit process, the county may require the applicant to submit certified documents from the Georgia Department of Transportation or the United States Department of Transportation or their successors regarding the classification of the road. 
(c)  Processing of application. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a sign as permitted under the provision of this article, the county, through its enforcement personnel, shall examine and process the application within a reasonable amount of time. Though a longer period of time may be reasonable under the circumstances of the case, five (5) business days shall be considered a reasonable amount of time in most cases. A permit may be denied if the applicant landowner or lessee is presently maintaining any sign in violation of this article. 
(d)  Procedure upon denial. Upon denial of the application of a permit, the applicant shall be given written notice stating the reason(s) for the denial within fifteen (15) days of the decision to deny the permit. Appeal from such denial may be taken to the board of appeals. 
(e)  Fees. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit fee as established by the governing body of Gordon County from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XIV) 
Sec. 13-15. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement personnel. The enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the county's code enforcement personnel, building officials, and all law and code enforcement personnel of Gordon County. The enforcement personnel shall have such powers as are reasonably necessary to enforce and give effect to this article. 
(b)  Public nuisance. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Maintenance and repair. Every sign including but not limited to those signs for which permits are required or for which no permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural material condition at all times, including the repair or replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign. 
(1)  The building inspector shall require compliance with all standards of this Code. If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety and maintenance standards, the building inspector shall require its removal in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Abandoned signs. Except as otherwise provided in this article any on-premises sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Any off-premises sign which no longer, and for a period of three (3) consecutive months, advertises goods, products, services or facilities available to the public or which directs persons to a different location where such goods, products, services or facilities are not for a period of three (3) consecutive months available, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. 
(e)  Dangerous or defective signs. No persons shall maintain, or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or the owner of the sign. Upon failure of the owners to remove or repair a dangerous or defective sign, the building [inspector] shall proceed as described in subsection (i) of this section. 
(f)  Unlawful signs. No person shall erect or permit to be erected any sign does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Sign in right-of-way. Any sign located in or projecting over a public right-of-way at the time of the effective date of this article [February 20, 2000] which was subject to removal or relocation at the owner's expense, pursuant to a permit or other ordinance of the county, shall be removed by the owner or altered at the owner's expense to comply with the regulations of this article. 
(h)  Removal of temporary signs. Upon adoption of this article any temporary sign, portable display sign or device included in this article shall be removed or made to conform to the provisions of this article within sixty (60) days of the date of notification by the building inspector or his designee. All subsequent violations shall be remedied within fourteen (14) days of the notification. 
(i)  Removal of signs by the building inspector: The building [inspector] or his designee shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety such as an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued. The building inspector or his designee shall prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation [and if] not corrected within ten (10) days the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  All notices mailed by the building inspector or his designee shall be sent by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail, or refusal of the person to whom in is addressed to accept same. 
(2)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such persons last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the building inspector ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the board of appeals within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the building inspector or his designee may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. 
(e)  Disposal of signs; costs. Any sign removed by the building inspector pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the county and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the county. The cost of removal of the sign by the county shall be considered a debt owned to the county by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property, and may be recovered in an appropriate court action by the county. The costs of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the county in connection with the sign's removal. 
(1)  When it is determined by the building inspector that said sign would cause an imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with a sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served. In this emergency situation, the building inspector may correct the danger, all costs being charged to the sign owner and property owner. 
(2)  If it shall be necessary for the building inspector to remove a sign pursuant to the provisions hereof, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the aforesaid removal, he may sell the same at private or public sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of removal shall be levied as an assessment against the property on which the sign is located. 
(f)  Invalid permits. The building inspector may issue a removal order when it has been determined that a permit was improperly issued, that the permit was issued on the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud, that the sign has not been constructed in compliance with this article or with the specification of the application or site plans, that the sign permit has expired or that the sign is otherwise not in compliance with this article. In the event a sign is not removed after receipt of a removal order by the owner of such sign or property, the building inspector may institute legal proceeding hereunder against the property owner, sign owner, lessee, sign erector or combination of the above. 
(g)  Civil actions. The building inspector or any individual or entity whose property interests are directly affected may bring a civil action to seek injunctive and other relief to enforce this article. 
(h)  Citations. Any violation of this article may be tried upon citations issued by the building inspector or his designee. Without limitation, sign erectors, sign owners and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this article. 
(i)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalty provided in this article or in any separate resolution, the penalty and/or fine for any one (1) sign found in violation of this article, tried upon a citation or upon an accusation and, as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of Gordon County, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), six (6) months incarceration or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies and penalties specified in this article are cumulative. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XV) 
Sec. 13-16. - Bonds and insurance. 
All persons engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, relocating, constructing or maintaining signs for compensation must post a bond or show proof of insurance in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage for any one (1) claim and public liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to one (1) person and possess a current business license at the time any sign permit is obtained, and said bond or insurance shall cover any and all damages, demands or expense of every character which may as a result of such erection, installation, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XVI) 
Sec. 13-17. - Indemnity. 
By accepting any permit or other permission to erect and maintain a sign or by acting in the erection or maintenance of a sign pursuant to such permit or other permission pursuant to this article, the permit holder, property owner, lessee (if any), sign erector, their agents, servants, employees, and assigns agree to hold harmless and indemnify the county, its officers, agents, servants, and employees from any and all claims for damages, including death, including but not limited to those resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation, construction or maintenance of a sign permitted or authorized under this article. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XVII) 
Sec. 13-18. - Variances. 
There shall be no deviation from the terms of this article unless a variance has been granted by the board of commissioners. Variances from the provisions of this article may be applied for and granted in the same procedural manner as variances from the Gordon County Zoning Ordinance, except that the variance will only be considered by and decided upon by the Gordon County Board of Commissioners. All other procedural and notice requirements for obtaining a variance and appeal thereof as outlined in the Gordon County Zoning shall be complied with by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XVIII) 
Sec. 13-19. - Inspection. 
(a)  The enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to enter into or inspect any building, structure, or premises upon which a sign subject to this article is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections and to insure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances. Inspections shall be carried out during reasonable business hours, unless and emergency exists. 
(b)  This provision is in addition to and without prejudice to the rights of other inspectors and regulators to enter into an inspect premises. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2000, § XIX) 
Secs. 13-20—13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERSTATE SIGN REGULATION 

Sec. 13-26. - Scope, general regulations. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way in the county. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(c)  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
(d)  All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. (the Georgia outdoor advertising code) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under such code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, these regulations shall apply. 
(e)  Any sign which advertises an activity, business product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of the activity, business, product or service. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § I) 
Sec. 13-27. - Prohibited signs. 
The following are prohibited signs: 
(1)  Signs imitating warning signals. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
(2)  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(3)  Signs painted or attached to natural features such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles or fence posts. 
(4)  Fluttering ribbons and banners. 
(5)  Signs within three hundred (300) feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § II) 
Sec. 13-28. - Home occupation signs. 
One (1) nonilluminated professional or business nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area is permitted as a home occupation sign. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(1)) 
Cross reference— Housing, § 4-66 et seq. 
Sec. 13-29. - Signs of work under construction. 
One (1) nonilluminated sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financing institution, selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. Such signs shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days after the completion of the project. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(2)) 
Sec. 13-30. - Temporary subdivision signs. 
Temporary signs not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than three hundred (300) feet apart. They shall be removed when seventy-five (75) percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(3)) 
Sec. 13-31. - Roof signs. 
Not more than one (1) roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one (1) building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(4)) 
Sec. 13-32. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the front surface of the building. 
(2)  Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of building shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively. 
(3)  Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall. 
(b)  Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five (5) feet. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(5)) 
Sec. 13-33. - Illuminated signs. 
Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(6)) 
Sec. 13-34. - Outdoor advertising signs. 
All outdoor advertising signage along interstates shall comply with current state law and D.O.T. regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(7); Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 13-35. - On-premises signs. 
On-premises signs located within one hundred (100) feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised would not be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(8)) 
Sec. 13-36. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article would be allowed to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. 
(Ord. of 10-24-89, § III(9)) 
Chapter 15 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; health, Ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; wastewater, Ch. 17; specific health hazards, § 6-110. 
State Constitution reference— Power of county to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Art. IX, § II, Par. III. 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; state grants for solid waste handling systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-38; effect of law on county powers, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; transporting refuse across county boundary for dumping without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; litter control, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 36-1-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT; DISPOSAL GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aquifer means a water-bearing stratum of permeable rock, sand or gravel. 
Baling means a volume reduction technique whereby solid waste is compressed into bales. 
Certificate means a document issued by a college or university of the state university system or other organization approved by the director, stating that the operator has met the requirements of the board for the specified operator classification of the certification program. 
Collector means the person or persons as defined herein who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial hauler or hauler means a collector or any person engaged in any business or enterprise activity where solid waste is generated in the course of a business or enterprise, transported in the course of a business or enterprise, or disposed of as a result of a business or enterprise; but shall not mean a private resident acting solely on his own behalf and that of his primary residence. 
Commercial waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities or commercial enterprises, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid waste. 
Construction/demolition waste means the waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper or cardboard. 
County means Gordon County, Georgia, or the Gordon County Board of Commissioners, as the context requires. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, which includes administration, personnel, land equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Garbage means food waste including waste accumulations of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Incinerator means all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid, liquid or gaseous waste by burning. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste under regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
Inert waste landfill means a disposal site accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to dirt and dirt-like products, concrete, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste. 
Infectious waste means all biomedical waste as defined in section .15(a) of the rules of the division. 
Leachate means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a sanitary landfill for collecting the leachate which may percolate through the wastes and into the soil surrounding the landfill. 
Liner means a continuous layer of natural or manmade materials, beneath or on the sides of a disposal site or disposal site cell which restricts the downward or lateral escape of solid waste, solid waste constituents or leachate. 
Liquid waste means any waste material that is determined to contain free liquids as defined by Method 9095 (Paints Filter Liquids Test), as described in Test Methods of Evaluation of Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA Pub. No. SW-846). 
Mixed loads means any commercial/industrial and residential mix within the same container. 
Nuisance means anything which meets that definition of the term as defined by O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 and which occurs during or as the result of the handling or disposing of solid waste. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one (1) or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Operator means the person having direct supervision of daily field operation of a disposal site to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Processing operation means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form or chemical content of solid waste and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements). 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Pyrolysis means the chemical decomposition of a material by heat in the absence of oxygen. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid wastes for future use in accordance with a procedure approved by the division. 
Recycling means any process by which reclaimed materials or solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Residential waste means household waste and any waste derived from the residential occupancy of single-family dwelling units. 
Rubbish means waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass, crockery, dunnage and/or similar materials. 
Rules for scrap tire management means those rules promulgated by and amended by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division and contained in Chapter 391-3-4-.19 of the Rules for Solid Waste Management, amended 1993. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon. 
Sanitary landfilling means an engineered method of disposing of putrescible solid wastes on land by spreading them in thin layers, compacting them to the smallest practical volume, placing an earth cover thereon and such other measures as are necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
Scavenge means the uncontrolled picking of discarded solid waste materials. 
Shredding means the process by which solid waste is cut or torn into small pieces for final disposal or further processing. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means any area as designated on Hydrologic Atlas, No. 18, Maps of the Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia, 1989, as published by the Georgia Geologic Survey, environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste and materials destined for recycling, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, etc.), refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this article. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Solid waste handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof, occurs. 
Solid waste handling permit means written authorization granted to a person by the board of commissioners to engage in solid waste handling. 
Solid Waste Management Act or the Act, wherever referred to in this chapter, means O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Special solid waste means any solid waste not otherwise regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., and regulations promulgated thereunder or originating or produced from or by a source or generator not subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-27(g). 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal site or processing operation. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § III; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-27. - Intent, scope. 
(a)  It is the intention of the board of commissioners in enacting this article to provide for disposal of solid waste in the incorporated and unincorporated area of the county; to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout the county of any and all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the county which is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens. 
(b)  As of the effective date of this article and/or any amendments hereto, only commercial haulers who have properly registered with the county Redbone Ridges Landfill shall be permitted to discharge waste. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § I; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-28. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is as follows: 
(1)  To provide environmentally sound, cost-efficient refuse disposal in accordance with the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division rules and regulations (Solid Waste Management Act, Chapter 391-3-4) and any amendments or changes to the rules and regulations thereto. 
(2)  To provide safe operation of the facilities; 
(3)  To secure data for waste disposal planning. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § II; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-29. - Registration. 
The county shall register all commercial haulers seeking to utilize county landfill operations for the disposal of solid waste. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § IV; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-30. - Registration procedures. 
(a)  Who must register. All persons or haulers of commercial, residential or industrial solid waste (as defined by the rules and regulations of the EPD), who seek to dispose of that solid waste in the county landfill facilities, shall register. An individual transporting domestic or household waste from his residence need not register. 
(b)  Registration fees. Annual registration fees shall cost twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or as may annually be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Vehicles qualifying for registration. A qualifying vehicle shall have the business name, business address and/or telephone number permanently affixed to each side of the vehicle in letters and numbers at least three (3) inches in height. When roll-offs are used, the name of the company must appear on each roll-off container. A regularly used business logo may also be displayed. No other names or numbers not required by law shall be displayed. To qualify, a vehicle must be owned or leased by the applicant. 
(d)  Application for registration. A person desiring to register to deliver solid waste to the county landfill must submit a completed application for registration to the person designated to process applications and issue registrations. Such applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the collection vehicle who is applying for the registration. 
(2)  The listing of all collection vehicles under the registration, which listing shall contain the following information for each vehicle: 
a.  The state motor vehicle registration number; 
b.  Description of the chassis by year and manufacturer, with the number of wheels; 
c.  Description of the body by year and manufacturer; 
d.  Evidence of the insurance coverage as required by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  A written listing of the area or areas served by the vehicles listed in the registration application. Applicant is obligated to notify of additions or deletions to the list of areas served. 
(4)  Additional data, information, certification, etc., as deemed necessary in order to verify the accuracy of information contained in the application forms and attendant documents. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § V; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-31. - Hauler vehicle construction and maintenance. 
Solid waste disposal vehicles utilized by haulers of commercial, residential or industrial waste must meet the following minimum requirements both prior to and following approval of registration: 
(1)  The collection vehicle body shall be capable of being readily emptied. 
(2)  The collection vehicle shall be kept in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  The collection vehicle must provide for a means of loading only at the top, side or rear, depending upon the design of the enclosed body. 
(4)  The collection vehicle must be so equipped that all loading openings on the bodies have adequately tightly fitting doors or covers with latch, clamps or other methods to keep them closed and rubber or other suitable gasket to render them leakproof, spillproof, dust proof and odor proof to the maximum extent practicable. 
(5)  Roll-off boxes must be of welded construction and doors must be tightly fitted so as to render them leakproof and spillproof. Provisions need to be made to facilitate application of tightly fitting tarpaulin covers. 
(6)  All unloading doors must be equipped with chains to keep them securely fastened in an open position when unloading. 
(7)  The collection vehicle shall be equipped with heavy duty front hooks, loops or shackles, good and serviceable tires and other accessories as necessary for operation and/or navigation in or about the landfill facility. 
(8)  Each collection vehicle used or proposed for use by an applicant, as well as the contents of any collection vehicle shall be subject at all times to inspection by county landfill personnel and/or the county ordinance officer. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § VI; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-32. - Transporting and discharging solid waste. 
Each registrant under this article shall comply with the following requirements of transporting and/or delivering solid waste: 
(1)  Solid waste shall be suitably enclosed or covered to prevent littering and spillage of solid waste or fluids or infiltration of rainwater. Tarps must be used to cover compactor box openings, roll-off tops, etc. Tarpaulins must be kept in good repair at all times. 
(2)  Any spillage of solid waste on the roads leading to the landfill or in the landfill prior to or following actual disposal is the responsibility of the hauler and shall be immediately cleaned and removed by the hauler. Any and all costs incurred by the county by reason of any spillage shall be immediately remitted to the county by the responsible registrant. This provision is in addition to any other penalty authorized elsewhere in this chapter or any other ordinance or by state law. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § VII; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-33. - Industrial process solid waste/sludge. 
(a)  Any person causing or allowing industrial process solid waste or latex sludge to be delivered to a county landfill for disposal shall guarantee that the originator of the waste has submitted a material safety data sheet to the county landfill department and has received approval from both the county and the state environmental protection division. Copies of the waste acceptance policy can be obtained at the county landfill department. 
(b)  If there are any risks or additional costs involved in accepting any industrial process solid waste, the county may impose an industrial process solid waste disposal surcharge to compensate the county for such risks and additional cost including administrative expenses and overhead. The following factors will be considered in determining the amount of such industrial process solid waste surcharge: 
(1)  Volume of waste for disposal; 
(2)  Quality of waste (moisture, etc.); 
(3)  Degree of risk associated with such disposal; 
(4)  Additional handling, processing and disposal cost; 
(5)  Additional administrative expense and overhead; 
(6)  Additional environmental protection controls including monitoring. 
The industrial process solid waste surcharge shall be set by the board of commissioners without notice and public hearing thereon and may vary on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Any person causing or allowing industrial process solid waste to be delivered to a solid waste facility operated by or on behalf of the county shall be deemed to have agreed to indemnify and hold harmless the county for any costs reasonably incurred to protect against or reduce any risks resulting therefrom. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § VIII) 
Sec. 15-34. - Waste acceptance policy and regulations. 
(a)  Only residential, commercial and industrial waste generated in the county, those contiguous counties so designated by the board of commissioners, or through contracts negotiated and executed by the board of commissioners shall be allowed to be disposed of in the county landfill, and a tipping fee, as from time to time may be determined by the board of commissioners, may be charged. 
(b)  It is the intention of the county to accept only sludge wastes which have been approved by the state environmental protection division and deemed appropriate by the county. 
(c)  No hazardous waste will be accepted. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit hazardous waste on county landfill property. No material other than residential, commercial and industrial waste that has been approved by the state environmental protection division and the county may be deposited at the landfill. 
(d)  No biomedical waste, as defined by the regulations of the state environmental protection division (391-3-4-15) will be accepted at any county landfill. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit such waste on county landfill property. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  No waste originating outside the limits of the county shall be accepted at any county compactor site, nor shall any person deposit or attempt to deposit solid waste originating outside the limits of the county at any county compactor site, nor shall commercial or industrial waste be accepted or deposited at any county compactor site. 
(g)  Construction and demolition waste which originates in the county will be accepted if it does not contain any industrial waste components. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § IX; Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Sec. 15-35. - Fee schedule. 
The board of commissioners shall from time to time publish a fee schedule to be charged for depositing waste at a county landfill. Such schedules when published and posted at the county administrator's office and at a landfill site shall become part of this article as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § X) 
Sec. 15-36. - Facility rules for haulers. 
(a)  Liability of the county. All persons proceed onto the landfill at their own risk. The county shall not be liable for errors or omissions of its contractors, persons using the solid waste facility, or other third persons in or about the solid waste facility. 
(b)  Reservation of rights. 
(1)  Haulers' dumping privileges are limited to residential, industrial and commercial waste. The county reserves the right to inspect any load coming into the landfill. The dumping of any material other than residential, commercial or industrial waste or other than that described as manifest may result in a permanent revocation of dumping privileges. Liquid waste, biomedical waste and hazardous waste are specifically prohibited. Sludge waste may, in the discretion of the county, be allowed only if the hauler has submitted an application to the state environmental protection division and has received approval by the state environmental protection division for the sludge waste. 
(2)  If the county determines that any material or waste has been deposited which is in violation of any law, ordinance or the county's rules and regulations, the county may require the hauler to remove such waste or, in the alternative, the county may remove it and charge hauler with the expense of removing the unauthorized waste. The hauler will remain responsible for disposal of such waste in an approved facility. 
(3)  The county has the right to require the hauler to file a manifest for each load of any type of solid waste deposited at the landfill showing the source of all solid waste and a statement signed by the hauler and/or the generator of the solid waste certifying the solid waste is residential, industrial or commercial and describing the contents and/or origin thereof. 
(c)  Obedience to general rules. In all specifics, haulers and their agents and/or employees must abide by the terms of this article and rules promulgated pursuant hereto and posted at landfill and/or compactor sites. It is the duty and responsibility of the haulers and other persons using the county landfill to familiarize themselves with and to obey the rules of the facility as such rules may be changed or new rules adopted and posted on the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-1-90, § XI) 
Sec. 15-37. - Enforcement. 
The county ordinance officer is authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this article, the Solid Waste Management Act, and any applicable rules and regulations promulgated by and amended by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and specifically including the rules for scrap tire management as if quoted verbatim herein. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 15-62 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-14-96) 
Secs. 15-38—15-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Roads and highways, Ch. 12; county ordinance officer, § 2-4. 

Sec. 15-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means the unincorporated areas of Gordon County, Georgia. 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89, § L-1-1) 
Sec. 15-62. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the county or by any city or town located in the county for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as provided by state law; 
(2)  Anything in this section not withstanding, the person shall be directed by the court in which conviction is obtained to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance of not less than one (1) mile nor more than five (5) miles any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)  The person shall be directed by the judge of the court in which conviction is obtained to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89, § L-1-2; Ord. of 5-14-96; Ord. of 2-22-2000, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 15-63. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 15-62, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated sections 15-62 through 15-64. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of section 15-62 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated sections 15-62 through 15-64. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89, § L-1-3) 
Sec. 15-64. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this county are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-89, § L-1-4) 
Secs. 15-65—15-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 15-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 10-1-96, § I) 
Sec. 15-102. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the unincorporated areas of the county and within any municipalities located within the county which have not adopted an ordinance which is substantially similar to this article. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-1-96, § II) 
Sec. 15-103. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings transported to a county municipal solid waste disposal facility shall be sorted from other waste and diverted to a chipping, grinding, or composting area designated to receive such refuse, and it shall be the responsibility of the person transporting such refuse to insure diversion and separation. 
(Ord. of 10-1-96, § III) 
Sec. 15-104. - Penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating any section(s) of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  The county ordinance officer is authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-1-96, § IV) 
Chapter 16 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 4; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 8; roads and highways, Ch. 12; payment of taxes by cable television company, § 7-68. 
State Law reference— Issuance of notes, etc., in anticipation of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. Tit. 48; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2)—(5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 8-16-83, § 1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Special district sales and use tax. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 8 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq.) of the Georgia Public Revenue Code, the board of commissioners does hereby levy a joint county and municipal sales and use tax at the rate of one (1) percent within the special district whose boundaries are coterminous with the boundaries of the county. 
(Res. of 11-18-80) 
Sec. 16-3. - Refunds of taxes and license fees. 
(a)  In any case in which it is determined that an erroneous or illegal collection of any tax or fee has been made by the county or that a taxpayer has voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid any tax or fee, the taxpayer from whom the tax or fee was collected may file a claim for a refund with the board of commissioners or the tax commissioner of the county at any time within one year after the date of payment of the fee or within three (3) years after the date of payment of the tax. The claim for refund shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the taxpayer. 
(2)  The total amount of tax or fee paid and the date of payment. 
(3)  The amount of refund claimed. 
(4)  A summary statement of the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies. 
(5)  In the event the taxpayer desires a conference or hearing before the board of commissioners, he or she shall so specify in the claim. 
(b)  In all cases where the claim is based upon an obvious clerical error, the claim may be approved by the tax commissioner of the county. 
(c)  In disputed cases where there is no obvious error, the claim shall be approved or disapproved by the board of commissioners, and the taxpayer shall be notified in writing at the address set forth in the claim of the decision of the board. 
(d)  Any appeal from the decision of the board of commissioners shall be within the time and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-90. 
(e)  Any refunds approved shall be paid within sixty (60) days of the approval or within sixty (60) days of the entry of a final decision in any action for a refund. Any refund of taxes paid pursuant to this section shall be paid from the funds of the tax commissioner of the county. Any refund of fees paid pursuant to this section shall be paid from the general fund of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-5-91) 
Secs. 16-4—16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTEL-HOTEL TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 2000, deleted §§ 16-26—16-36 and enacted similar provisions, which have been designated as §§ 16-26—16-39. Former §§ 16-26—16-36 derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 6, 1977, and a motion of Dec. 6, 1983. 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 16-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Calhoun and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Calhoun is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Calhoun or his designee. 
Collection agent means the city clerk of the City of Calhoun. 
County means Gordon County and all the unincorporated territory of the county, wherein the county is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
County administrator means the duly appointed county administrator of Gordon County or his designee. 
Due date means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date, together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor motel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room or apartment in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten (10) continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Quarterly period means the calendar quarters of any year. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 1) 
Sec. 16-27. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the county, a tax at the rate of eight (8) percent of the amount of rent, unless an exemption is provided under section 16-29. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 2; Ord. of 6-4-13) 
Sec. 16-28. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guest rooms in this county shall collect a tax of five (5) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 16-29. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 3) 
Sec. 16-29. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 4) 
Sec. 16-30. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this county shall immediately register with the county clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that this section becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information, which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the county clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The county clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 5) 
Sec. 16-31. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the collection agent monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (1) month or less; and all additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the county by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the county shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the collection agency clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the collection agent. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for an operator who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any three (3) consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same, monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the county may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 6) 
Sec. 16-32. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the county is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any operator, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made for the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 16-31. 
(c)  Notice of determination, service of. The county shall give to the operator written notice of its determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the county. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 7) 
Sec. 16-33. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the collection agent shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the county. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 16-31(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 16-31. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 8) 
Sec. 16-34. - Collection of tax by county. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax, time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the county may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the county agent either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county, it may be offset by the county. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the county, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the county, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 9) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 16-35. - Collection of tax by county; lien; levy; execution and sale. 
(a)  Personal debt; lien established; effective date; property covered by lien. The taxes required to be paid under this article are the personal debts of the person required by this article to register, file the returns, and/or pay the taxes imposed by this article, hereinafter "taxpayer" Accordingly, a lien for taxes imposed by this article shall arise as of the time said taxes, including any deficiency or nonpayment estimated by the county, become due and are unpaid and said tax lien shall attach to all property and rights to property, including but not limited to, any account in or with a financial institution in which the taxpayer has an interest from the date the lien arises until said taxes, including any deficiency or nonpayment estimates computed by the county, are paid. 
(b)  Levy and sale in accordance with state laws. When said taxpayer, either because of neglect or refusal, does not pay taxes imposed by this article, including any estimates calculated by the county, penalties, interest, fees as required, or costs of collection to the county or any authorized representative may levy upon all property and rights to property belonging to taxpayer, except such as are exempt by law for the payment of the amounts due, together with interest on the amount, any penalty for nonpayment, and such further amount as shall be sufficient for the fees, costs and expenses of the levy. Said levy and judicial sale shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-55(d), as amended. 
(c)  Executions issued in accordance with state law. The issuance of execution for nonpayment of taxes collectible by the county under this article as to the date of issuance and the requirement notices shall conform to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-3-3, as amended. Further, all other provisions contained in Chapter 3 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as to tax executions where applicable are hereby adopted by reference hereto and specifically incorporated herein. 
(d)  Tax sales; state law applicable. In addition to and not in conflict with subsection (b) hereinabove, all provisions contained in Chapter 3, Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, where applicable, are hereby adopted by reference hereto and specifically incorporated herein as the procedures for tax sales by the county. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 10) 
Sec. 16-36. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of county administrator. The county administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the county shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the county may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the county. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports: Each year, in the month of January, the county administrator shall request in writing from the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the county during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The county administrator or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the county administrator may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody, information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the county administrator when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the county administrator may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 11) 
Sec. 16-37. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the county clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 12) 
Sec. 16-38. - Severability. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 13) 
Sec. 16-39. - Existing registrations and obligations. 
Existing registrations and obligations of persons now in effect to report and pay the tax imposed by this article, and not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, shall remain effective until such persons have been advised to begin the reporting and payment of the tax as imposed by this article, according to the day upon which the report and payment of taxes are due. 
(Ord. of 11-21-00, § 14) 
Sec. 16-40. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5) and (6) with an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five (5) percent to be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by the destination marketing organization which is hereby designated as the Convention and Visitor's Bureau of the Gordon County Chamber of Commerce, and the remaining amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five (5) percent to be expended for the development of new and existing parks, trails, and other recreational facilities, and improvements thereto, including programming, and for improving and/or developing physical infrastructure to promote and attract increased tourism to Gordon County as tourism product development. 
(Ord. of 6-21-05, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-13) 
Secs. 16-41—16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE 

Sec. 16-51. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75). 
(Ord. of 7-19-11, § 1) 
Sec. 16-52. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11, § 2) 
Sec. 16-53. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this article and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten (10) days of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-19-11, § 3) 
Sec. 16-54. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 (f). 
(Ord. of 7-19-11, § 4) 
Secs. 16-55—16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX ON SALE, USE, STORAGE, OR CONSUMPTION OF ENERGY 

Sec. 16-71. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 1) 
Sec. 16-72. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 2) 
Sec. 16-73. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Gordon County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Gordon County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two (2) percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 3) 
Sec. 16-74. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Gordon County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 4) 
Sec. 16-75. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Gordon County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 16-78 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 5) 
Sec. 16-76. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Gordon County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 6) 
Sec. 16-77. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114 (b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Gordon County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one (1) percent of such proceeds collected by Gordon County shall be paid into the general fund of Gordon County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Gordon County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two (2) local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Gordon County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Gordon County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one (1) such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Gordon County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Gordon County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Gordon County. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 7) 
Sec. 16-78. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Gordon County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-6-12, § 8) 
CODE DISPOSITION TABLE - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the county. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 