TECHNICAL MANUAL 

____________ 
City of Sandy Springs Department of Community Development Development and Construction 
  
TECHNICAL MANUAL 
____________ 
Adopted: August 15, 2017 
Effective: September 14, 2017 
____________ 

ORDINANCE NO. 2017-08-18 
STATE OF GEORGIA COUNTY OF FULTON 
AN ORDINANCE TO CODIFY PORTIONS OF A TECHNICAL MANUAL IN CONNECTION WITH THE ADOPTION OF A NEW DEVELOPMENT CODE FOR THE CITY OF SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA; TO PROVIDE FOR THE REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; TO PROVIDE FOR SEVERABILITY; TO PROVIDE FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER LAWFUL PURPOSES 
WHEREAS , the Constitution of the State of Georgia provides in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV thereof, that the governing authority of a city may adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning; and 
WHEREAS , pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, the governing bodies of municipalities and counties are authorized to develop, establish, and implement land use regulations that are consistent with the comprehensive plan of the municipality or county; and 
WHEREAS , the Georgia General Assembly has enacted the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 (Georgia Laws 1989, pp. 1317-1391, Act 634), which among other things provides for local governments to adopt plans and regulations to implement plans for the protection and preservation of natural resources, the environment and vital areas; and 
WHEREAS , the Georgia Department of Community Affairs has promulgated Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning (Chapter 110-3-2 of Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs) to implement the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, said standards and procedures were initially ratified by the Georgia General Assembly, and said rules which have been amended from time to time require local governments to describe regulatory measures and land development regulations needed to implement local government comprehensive plans; and 
WHEREAS , City Council adopted its initial Comprehensive Plan in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 and Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; and 
WHEREAS , to implement the initial Comprehensive Plan, City Council adopted the City of Sandy Springs Zoning Ordinance ("Zoning Ordinance") on December 27, 2005; and 
WHEREAS , City Council has adopted certain regulations to provide a system for the subdividing of lands within the City ("Land Development Regulations"), codified at Chapters 101-117 of the Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia ("Code"); and 
WHEREAS , the City has grown substantially since adoption of the initial Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Land Development Regulations and a new Comprehensive Plan was prepared ("New Comprehensive Plan"), as required by Georgia law; and 
WHEREAS , to implement the New Comprehensive Plan, City Council has this date adopted a new development code which incorporates a revised Zoning Ordinance and selected Land Development Regulations ("Sandy Springs Development Code") in accordance with requirements of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act; and 
WHEREAS , the Land Development Regulations contained in the Code currently contain a series of design standards; and 
WHEREAS , in addition to the design standards contained in the Land Development Regulations, other design standards are maintained by Community Development Department and Public Works Department personnel; and 
WHEREAS , the City desires to consolidate design standards, including codified design standards and the design standards maintained by staff (together, "Design Standards"), into one document to be designated "Technical Manual" to coordinate design review and plan development under the newly adopted Sandy Springs Development Code; and 
WHEREAS , the Technical Manual will contain codified Design Standards requiring City Council review and approval for modifications thereto ("Technical Manual Codified Provisions"); and 
WHEREAS , the Technical Manual will also contain construction guidelines and administrative forms and checklists ("Technical Manual Administrative Guidelines") which may be modified by staff as best practices emerge; and 
WHEREAS , City Council desires to adopt by this Ordinance the Technical Manual Codified Provisions of the Technical Manual, as described in Section 1 below; and 
WHEREAS , appropriate City Charter and Code provisions have been complied with in connection with development of the Technical Manual, including the Technical Manual Codified Provisions. 
NOW, THEREFORE , the Council for the City of Sandy Springs hereby ordains, as follows: 
Section 1 
Certain provisions of the Land Development Regulations are deleted from the Land Development Regulations currently codified at Chapters 101-117 of the Code, and are incorporated into the Technical Manual as Technical Manual Codified Provisions, to wit: 
Chapter 103 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURES 
Sec. 103-31. - Assignment of names and address. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 103-48. - Standard drawings. 
ARTICLE X. - PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 
Sec. 103-56. - Conceptual plan/preliminary plat specifications. 
Sec. 103-57. - Subdivision development plans. 
Sec. 103-58. - Final plat specifications. 
Sec. 103-59. - Residential site plan. 
Sec. 103-60. - Site development plans. 
Sec. 103-61. - Tree preservation/replacement plan specifications. 
Sec. 103-62. - Buffer and landscape plan specifications. 
ARTICLE XI. - STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 103-73. - Driveways intersections and access improvements. 
Sec. 103-76. - Roadway design. 
Sec. 103-77. - Street intersections. 
Sec. 103-78. - Street construction. 
Sec. 103-79. - Curb and gutter. 
Sec. 103-80. - Sidewalks and multiuse trails. 
Sec. 103-81. - Mailboxes - General requirements. 
Sec. 103-82. - Traffic control devices. 
Sec. 103-83. - Street lights. 
Sec. 103-84. - Reference. 
ARTICLE XII. - UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS 
Sec. 103-93. - Water system and fire hydrants. 
Sec. 103-94. - Sanitary sewer disposal. 
Sec. 103-95. - Separation of water and sanitary sewer lines. 
Sec. 103-96. - Easements. 
Sec. 103-97. - Street cuts. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE 
Sec. 103-105. - Erosion control. 
Sec. 103-106. - Earthwork. 
Sec. 103-107. - Retaining walls. 
Sec. 103-108. - Culverts. 
Sec. 103-109. - Pipe collection systems. 
Sec. 103-110. - Stormwater management. 
Sec. 103-111. - Dams. 
Chapter 110 - WATER CONSERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 110-1. - Short title. 
Sec. 110-2. - Purpose. 
Sec. 110-3. - Adoption of water use rules. 
Sec. 110-4. - Water conservation incentives. 
Sec. 110-5. - Additional water conservation measures. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 110-6. - Rain sensor shut-off switch required. 
Sec. 110-6.1. - Water stewardship restrictions. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 110-7. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
Sec. 110-8. - Violations. 
Section 2 
The Technical Manual Codified Provisions included in the Technical Manual, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted. 
Section 3 
All ordinances and resolutions or portions thereof in conflict with this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
Section 4 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Ordinance shall be declared illegal by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such an illegality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Ordinance and shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or constitutional. 
Section 5 
The Technical Manual, including the Technical Manual Codified Provisions, shall be effective thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED this the 15 th day of August, 2017. 
Approved: 

Attest: 

(Seal) 
SECTION 1 - LANDSCAPE, TREE AND BUFFER SUBMITTAL PLANS AND PLANTING STANDARDS 
Should any standard conflict with the Development Code, the Development Code shall govern. 
A.  Canopy Cover Requirements   
1.  Coverage area of site is based on calculation of trees to remain and trees to be planted to be no less than the allowances listed in the Tree Conservation Ordinance, most current version. 
2.  Canopy cover requirements shall be established for the protection of all existing Protected Trees. 
3.  Canopy can be determined by actual measurement or by general assignment. 
a.  Actual measurement is the measured square footage of the canopy of a tree. 
b.  General assignment attributes square footage base on the potential canopy size of a species (small, medium, or large) as indicated in the Recommended Species List (See Section 1.L). 
4.  Trees planted to meet canopy cover standards must be maintained in healthy condition for a minimum of three (3) full growing seasons. See Figure 1 for sample canopy calculations. 
B.  Landscape Strips on Private Property   
1.  The width of landscape strips must, as a minimum, conform to the requirements of the conditions of zoning or the requirements of the Development Code. 
2.  The width is measured from the newly dedicated right-of-way or from the property lines of contiguous parcels, as applicable. 
3.  No permanent structures are permitted within landscape strips. This includes retaining walls, curbing, dumpsters, detention facilities, etc. Monument signs, drainage structures, transformer, and sidewalks may be allowed only with pre-approval. 
4.  Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking lot landscape islands. One curb stop per parking stall is required. 
5.  Signs within required landscape strips are subject to the approval of the Department of Community Development. These signs may only be located in areas of turf or groundcover and must not conflict with the growth potential of trees and shrubs. Signs are not permitted within required undisturbed buffers. 
6.  The deposition of storm water runoff into drainage swales through landscape strips is generally not permitted. Exceptions will be considered only if the design complies with BMPs described by standards of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual. Under no circumstances may the width of a drainage easement through a landscape strip exceed the width of the strip. The size and configuration of the landscape strip may be altered to accommodate the drainage swale. 
Figure 1 - Sample Canopy Calculations 
This example is a single family residential lot. Please see Development Code for specific requirements of property. All trees 18" caliper and above must be identified on the site plan. Additional calculations are required for the Tree Fund, if applicable according to Development Code. 

 
7.  All species within required landscape strips must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. If non-native ornamental trees are used to satisfy landscape strip requirements, they will not count for satisfying canopy requirements. 
8.  A mix of species of trees is preferred when 6 or more trees are required. 
9.  All plant materials are subject to approval by the City of Sandy Springs. 
10.  All trees must be planted in a suitable soil volume. In a normal surface planting environment with average soil depths greater than or equal to 3 feet, soil volume calculations may be based on surface areas as follows: 
a.  Small canopy tree = 25 square feet 
b.  Medium canopy tree = 150 square feet 
c.  Large canopy tree = 300 square feet 
11.  Required trees shall be planted between mid-October and the end of February. The survival of trees planted outside of that time period shall be guaranteed by placing funds in escrow with the Department of Community Development. Funds may be placed in escrow in lieu of planting pending the desirable planting season. The total amount deposited shall include the purchase, transport and installation of plant materials. 
12.  Trees planted to meet the landscape strip standards must be maintained in good health for a minimum of 3 full growing seasons. 
13.  Sub-surface soil cells or structural soils must be used to obtain a 3 foot minimum depth and soil volume where tree planting is to occur with limited surface areas or within built structures such as parking lots and sidewalks. Use is subject to approval by City of Sandy Springs. 
14.  Spacing and species selection is subject to Sandy Springs Director or designee approval. Compensation may be granted for the protection of existing trees. 
C.  Planting within Rights-of-Way   
1.  Approval from the Department of Community Development, Department of Public Works and the Georgia Department of Transportation (D.O.T), where applicable, is required, as planting is generally not permitted in the rights-of-way other than is required, as planting is generally not permitted in the rights-of-way other than required street trees. When trees are planted in the rights-of-way the following conditions shall be met: 
a.  A minimum of three inch (3") caliper trees shall be planted. 
b.  A minimum soil volume per these Administrative Standards. 
c.  Ideal spacing of large trees is 30 to 50 feet on center. 
d.  Underground utilities shall be installed prior to planting. 
2.  Where approval is received, the following conditions must be met: 
a.  Indemnification and Maintenance agreements must be recorded with the City prior to permitting irrigation or planting within City rights-of-way. 
b.  Agreements must be recorded in the name of a Homeowner's Association (along with documentation attesting to that association's existence), for subdivisions. 
c.  These agreements must be recorded in the property owner's name for all other types of projects. 
d.  Trees planted within rights-of-way cannot be counted toward the tree canopy or landscape strip requirements for a site. 
e.  Prior to planting trees in rights-of-way, a shoulder cross-section must be provided indicating the placement of the trees in relation to the curb, and underground utilities. Placement and species are subject to the approval of the Sandy Springs Arborist and the Director. 
f.  Drawings for irrigation system within rights-of-way must indicate the location of lines, meter, heads, spray radius, shut off valves, timers and a 24 hour emergency contact phone number. 
D.  Buffers on Private Property   
1.  Definitions of different buffers are found in the Development Code. 
2.  When land use of a property changes, the minimum requirements for the new use shall be met. 
3.  Required undisturbed buffers must remain undisturbed and actively protected in perpetuity under the auspices of the Tree Conservation section of the Development Code. 
4.  Buffers must be replanted where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
5.  All buffer plant materials are subject to approval by the City of Sandy Springs. 
6.  The buffers shall be replanted to meet the following standards: 
a.  To accomplish screening, the plant materials must be evergreen and a minimum 5 feet in height at time of planting, with branching full to the ground. 
b.  The number of planting rows for tree replacement in buffers is determined by buffer width as provided in Development Code Sec. 8.2. 
7.  Encroachment into buffers for the construction of retaining walls, footing, or wall supports is not permitted unless otherwise specified in the conditions of rezoning. Encroachments into undisturbed buffers shall be requested through rezoning or variance, as applicable. Drainage within or through buffers may require additional width to compensate for drainage area, and is subject to the approval of the City. 
8.  No grading is allowed in buffers unless permission is obtained through City Arborist review and Director approval. 
E.  State Water Buffers — See Development Code   
Mitigation plans shall be required to meet the submittal criteria prepared by the Department. 
F.  Chattahochee River Corridor Tributary Protection Area — See Development Code   
G.  Off-Street Parking   
Storm water runoff into parking lot landscape islands may be permitted upon approval by the Sandy Springs Arborist and Chief Engineer, provided design complies with standards established by the Georgia Storm Water Manual, most current edition. See Div. 8.2 of the Development Code for other landscaping requirements in off-street parking. 
H.  Tree Conservation and Protection Plan (TCPP) Preparation Guidelines   
1.  Evaluate the conservation potential of all trees on site based on their species, health, structural condition, and location in relation to site modifications and proposed structures and utilities. 
2.  Diagram the approximate location of the trees' critical root zones (CRZ), based on 1.25 feet of radius for every inch of diameter at breast height (dbh), or drip-line. 
3.  Evaluate trees on adjacent properties for a full range of potential impacts, and negotiate mitigating actions with the adjacent property owners. 
4.  Either modify the site plan or identify trees that cannot be protected to be removed. Generally, trees that suffer disturbance to 25% of the CRZ are considered destroyed. Variables include the nature of disturbance, the potential to mitigate damage, the species of tree, its condition, and vigor. 
5.  Disturbance to the CRZ includes changing the finish elevation of the soil 3" or greater by cutting or filling, compaction by activity or storage of materials, or any cutting or trenching. 
6.  The protection of clumps or groupings of trees is more effective than individual trees. 
7.  Plan for how the full range of site activities could potentially impact the trees. Identify staging areas for parking, material storage, construction debris, and concrete washout. 
8.  Identify way to insure sub-contractor understanding and compliance with the Tree Protection Plan. 
I.  TCPP Implementation   
1.  Conduct pre-construction tree maintenance - fertilization, and pruning remove structural defects, deadwood, or to improve clearance for equipment and structures. Educate all workers on site about tree protection techniques and requirements. 
2.  Requirements shall be noted on landscape and tree plan. 
3.  Establish a tree protection zone equal to the trees' critical root zone, (1.25' × 1"cal dbh), or as a minimum along the limits of disturbance. 
4.  Install tree protection fencing prior to any land disturbance. 
5.  Acceptable Tree Fencing includes the following (See Figure 2): 
a.  A minimum 4 feet high barrier, constructed in a post and rail configuration. A 2-inch × 4-inch post and a double 1-inch × 4-inch rail are recommended. 
b.  Four foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing with posts set at 6 foot on center maximum. 
c.  Any deviation from the two acceptable tree fencing methods listed above must be authorized by the Sandy Springs Arborist. 
6.  Construction offices, vehicular parking, worker break sites, and material storage and debris area are to be place outside of the tree protection zones. 
7.  Underground and overhead utility lines that would require trenching or severe pruning of protected trees shall be re-routed. Tunneling or boring can be used to install underground utilities within a tree protection zone. Boring shall be at least 24 inches beneath the surface. (See Figure 3). 
8.  Where tree roots must be cut, make only sharp, clean cuts to promote root regeneration. 
9.  When clearing and grading is planned in close proximity to a tree protection zone, the limit of disturbance shall be defined by a clean trench cut to a depth of 36 inches, to prevent the shredding and tearing of protected roots. 
10.  Grade change in the Critical Root Zones of trees will destroy roots. Retaining walls shall be used to minimize the impact grade changes near or within the Critical Root Zones of Protected Trees to minimize damage and to count for canopy requirements (See Figure 4). 
11.  Monitor compliance with tree protection requirements and tree health regularly during construction. 
12.  Fencing may be removed at the end of the project for the installation of landscaping. 
J.  TCPP Follow up Maintenance   
1.  Complete post-construction tree maintenance, including pruning, mulching, fertilization, irrigation, and soil aeration where necessary. 
2.  Apply at least 1 inch of water per week by deep watering in the absence of adequate rainfall. 
3.  Fertilize trees with phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and other macro- and micro-nutrients as indicated by a soil test, but wait at least one year to apply any nitrogen. Fertilize lightly with nitrogen after 1 year. 
4.  Inspect trees annually for at least 3 and up to 5 years after construction to look for changes in condition and signs of insects or disease, and to determine maintenance needs. Maintenance of plantings visible to the public streets is required and subject to Code Enforcement measures. 
K.  Planting Standards   
Transplanting procedures shall follow standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture in the "Trees and Shrub Transplanting Manual," latest edition. The following is a summary of several key practices. 
1.  Pre-Planting Considerations 
i.  Only healthy trees with a well-developed root system and a well formed top, characteristic of the species, shall be planted. Standards for selecting quality stock may be provided by the City Arborist. 
ii.  Trees selected for planting must be compatible with the specific site conditions. A site specific tree list is provided in subsection M, further below. 
iii.  Make certain there is adequate planting area and soil volume for the tree and the potential size of the tree is appropriate for the site, including potential conflicts with sight distance, traffic and pedestrian clearance, and overhead utilities. (Utilities Protection Center 1-800-282-7411). 
iv.  Contractors must call (811) for utility location of underground utilities prior to digging. 
v.  Deciduous and evergreen trees shall be planted between the end of October and the end of February. 
Figure 2 - Tree Protection Fencing (not to scale) 

Figure 3 - Tunneling for Underground Utilities 

Figure 4 - Correct Methods for Grade Changes 
How to preserve existing trees with the use of retaining walls when grade changes are necessary 

Grade Change Examples - Methods of preventing root suffocation from fill dirt when changing grade 

2.  Planting Procedures 
i.  Planting holes shall be no less than two (2) times the width of the root ball or bare roots of the tree being planted. A planting hole 3 to 5 times the width of the root ball is recommended. Figure 5 is the Tree Planting Standard Detail. 
ii.  Trees shall not be planted deeper than they were in their former location or container, and shall be 1-4" higher than the surrounding finish grade. 
iii.  Spade compacted bottom and sides of the planting hole shall be roughed or scarified to allow the penetration of developing roots. 
iv.  Water drainage from the bottom of the planting hole essential for root establishment. 
v.  Avoid the application of soil amendments or fertilizer at the time of planting. 
vi.  All plants must be watered to saturation immediately upon planting. When planting trees, it is recommended that trees be set and the pit backfilled half way, then soaked to verify good drainage, then planting completed, and watered again to saturation. 
Figure 5 - Tree Planting Standard Detail (not to scale) 

L.  Tree Maintenance   
1.  Tree Pruning 
a.  Only experienced professional arborists shall prune trees. Arborists certified by the International Society of Arboriculture have tested to insure a minimum level of arboricultural competency and maintain their certification with continuing education. Arborist shall follow ANSI A-300 Standards for Tree Care Operations. 
b.  The objectives for tree pruning shall be established prior to commencement of pruning activity. 
c.  Tree shall never be "topped". Topping a tree permanently damages a tree's structure, destroys its value, damages its health, and decreases the tree's safety. 
d.  Climbing spikes shall never be used to prune a tree. 
e.  Always prune branches back to parent branches or branches at least 1/3 the diameter of the branch being pruned. 
f.  No more than 1/4 of the foliage of a mature tree shall be removed in any one growing season. 
g.  Make proper pruning cuts, using the three cut method (See Figure 6). 
h.  Avoid stub cuts, flush cuts and wounds to the remaining limbs and trunk. 
i.  Pruning cuts shall be made just on the outside of the branch collar (See Figure 6). 
j.  At the time of planting prune only dead, damaged, broken crossing, or rubbing branches. 
k.  Do not remove more than 1/3 of the foliage from a young tree during any one growing season. 
2.  Mulching 
a.  Tree mulching is very beneficial to trees because it help retain soil moisture, moderates soil temperature, suppresses weed growth, reduces soil compaction, and reduces the potential for mower and string trimmer damage to trees. 
b.  Use organic materials such as pine straw, leaves, aged wood chips and compost. Avoid grass clippings, plastic, and rocks. 
c.  Use the tree's own fallen leaves for mulch. 
d.  Spread mulch in an even layer, 3—4 inches deep. Avoid mounding the mulch around the tree's trunk. 
e.  Keep mulch at least 5 inches from the tree's trunk. 
f.  For newly planted trees, mulch an area at least 5 feet in diameter. 
g.  For older established trees, mulch out as far as practical, mulching to the drip line is most desirable. 
Figure 6. Three Cut Pruning Method 

3.  Soil Environment 
a.  Maintaining healthy soils reduces tree stress and improves tree the survival, growth, and longevity; improves root structure, and reduces the potential for tree failure. 
b.  Adequate soil volume shall be maintained throughout the life time of tree. In a normal surface planting environment with average soil depths greater than or equal to 3 feet, soil volume calculations can be based on surface areas as follows: 
i.  Small tree = 25 square feet 
ii.  Medium tree = 150 square feet 
iii.  Large tree = 300 square feet 
c.  Soil organic matter content shall be maintained at 5 percent volume. 
d.  Mulching trees will increase soil nutrient levels, organic matter content and improve soil structure. 
e.  Root barriers shall be used to redirect root growth away from sidewalks, curbs and driveways. 
f.  Avoid soil compaction within the critical root zone of trees. Soil compaction results in an increase in soil bulk density, reduces soil pore space, decreases soil oxygen, and limits the availability of water. 
g.  Parking, driving, and the temporary storage of construction material within a tree's critical root zone will result in soil compaction. 
4.  Fertilization 
a.  Trees that are in an urban growing environment with limited natural nutrient cycling shall be fertilized on a regular basis. 
b.  If trees are exhibiting symptoms of nutrient deficiency, soils shall be tested prior to fertilization, and the fertilizer formulation shall be adjusted to address the specific deficiency. 
c.  Newly planted, drought stressed or severely damaged or injured trees shall not be fertilized. 
d.  Fertilizer shall be applied when roots are actively growing. The best times are late winter, early spring through early summer. 
e.  Nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium (NPK) in a ratio of 3:1:1 is most desirable. 
f.  Slow release nitrogen shall be applied at a rate of 2 to 4 pounds (of elemental nitrogen) per 1,000 square feet of rooting area. 
g.  Fertilizer shall be applied within the entire root zone of trees. Sub-surface applications to a depth of 4 to 12 inches are ideal. 
h.  The use of trunk fertilizer injections or implants is not recommended. 
5.  Irrigation 
a.  Adequate soil moisture levels result in better tree growth, reduced stress, and reduced susceptibility to insect or disease problems. 
b.  Excessive soil moisture can result in anaerobic conditions, nutrient deficiencies, and tree decline. 
c.  Tree species shall be matched to anticipated soil conditions. 
d.  Mulching trees helps conserve water. 
e.  In the absence of adequate rainfall trees shall be irrigated at the rate of 1 inch of water every 5 to 7 days. Refer to Approximate Watering Time chart below for approximate water application times. 
f.  Water shall be applied evenly throughout the outer 75% of a tree's critical root zone; runoff shall be avoided. 
Approximate Watering Time to Apply One Inch of Water Across Various Sized Critical Root Zones 

 
  
M.  Recommended Species List   
The Sandy Springs Tree Species List is intended to support site planning and design activities for tree conservation and establishment, and tree maintenance planning and decision-making. In the list, trees are arranged alphabetically by the tree's common name with the "genus" listed first. For example, red maple is listed as "Maple, Red" (maple is the genus name). The Latin name is also listed for more definitive species identification. In some cases, the commonly planted variety or cultivar of the species has also been included apart from the species. 
Table 1-2. Canopy Credit: Unaccepted Species List 

 
Cultivars and varieties may not qualify in the same manner as the species for canopy credits. 
Large and medium-sized canopy species are considered shade trees; small-sized canopy species are considered understory or ornamental trees. 
Table 1-3. Recommended Species List  (Species not listed may be considered for City Arborist approval) 
Large Canopy Shade Trees (1,000 sf credit) 

 
  
Medium Canopy Trees (500 sf credit) 

 
Small Canopy Trees (250 sf credit) 

 
SECTION 2 - STREET FRAMEWORK AND MOBILITY MAPS: TYPICAL SECTIONS AND DETAILS BY STREET 
A.  Street Framework Map. Required infrastructure improvement specifications are managed as a series of attributes in geographic digital format by street segment ("Cross Section Standards Database"). The Street Framework Map (Figure 2-1) adopted by resolution as an element of the City Development Code establishes the categorization of these by type. Each street segment identified within the Street Framework is assigned the typical standards that apply to the street segment, either as: Type A - F, street name, or Small Area name (section 10.4 of the Development Code). See Figures 2-2A-F. Applicants must provide facilities as identified by the subsequent map series as dictated by project location. Dimensions shall meet the Cross Sections Database and Mapping Tool, which implement official City policy, including the Transportation Master Plan, the most recent Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan, Comprehensive Plan, Small Area Studies or Livable Community Initiative Studies and Updates, among others, as adopted by resolution and as amended from time to time.   
B.  Cross Sections Standards Database and Table. Table 2-1 presents the official dimensions recorded in the geo-spatial database "Cross Section Standards," which is managed by the City of Sandy Springs GIS department as approved by the Director. Table 2-1 illustrates the content of the database as of the date of publication of this document, which will be updated only periodically. For most current standards, refer to the GIS mapping tool available on-line or through GIS or the Department.   
Waivers to design and construction according to the specifications may be requested and considered by the Director as provided within the Development Code. Considerations include the degree to which the Capital Improvements Plan, TSPLOST, or CIE provide for the required infrastructure and is already under construction. This consideration does not exempt from dedication of the full Right-of-Way. Additional Right-of-Way may be required if a planned, designed, or funded City/County/State project exists and has not yet been included in the most recent update to the GIS mapping tool. 
Modification of any street's assigned type requires a modification to the City Development Code. Modification of the specific elements' dimensions for a street may be requested and considered for approval by the Director as provided within the Development Code. 
Any new streets shall be assigned a type by the Director. A new street type requires modification to the City Development Code. 
C.  City Center Network. The City has substantially implemented the adopted City Center Master Plan. In 2017, staff and a consultant team prepared an update to the City Center subarea transportation network to reflect built conditions since the Plan's adoption and establish appropriate revised streetscapes, accordingly. The City Center Network map (Figure 2-2) identifies locations for required new streets, alleys and paths. An associated set of City Center Cross Sections provides constructions standards associated with both existing streets and new, required connections.   
D.  Additional Mobility Maps. Subsequent mobility maps identify which streets require the particular infrastructure facility or element identified by the map (on-street parking, pedestrian lighting, bicycle facilities or reserved-right-of-way for facilities).   
Figure 2.1 - Street Framework Map 
  

Table 2-1 Cross Sections Standards by Road 

 

Figure 2-2a City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figure 2-2b City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figure 2-2c City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figure 2-2d City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figure 2-2e City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figure 2-2f City Center Network: Cross Sections 

Figures 2-3 A—F Street Framework Types 
  
Two-Lane, No Parking      Type A 


 
Two-Lane, Parking      Type B 


 
Two-Lane, Median, No Parking      Type C 


 
Two-Lane, Median, Parking      Type D 


 
Four-Lane, Median, No Parking      Type E 


 
Two-Lane, Residential      Type F 


 
Roswell Road 


 
Powers Ferry Road 


 
Mount Vernon Highway 


 
Alley, Residential 


 
Alley, Mixed Use 


 
Pedestrian Passage 
  
  


 
Multi-Use Trail 


 
Commuter Trail 


 
  
  
  
Mobility Maps Series 





SECTION 3 - ROADWAY DESIGN AND PAVEMENT 
The following table contains the specified construction sheets that applicant design must conform to; sheets are available digitally on the City web page and by request: 

 
*as modified with the Development Code, latest edition. 
A.  General requirements.   
1.  The sections enumerated in this article are guidelines, and are intended to be benchmark indicators of what standards could be acceptable. They are further intended to allow alternate designs which could produce results similar to these performance standards and similar protection to the public. The objective of these performance standards is not to suggest a single methodological standard of acceptance exclusive of all others. Rather they establish what would otherwise be allowed in the absence of an acceptable alternative. 
2.  All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development, whether to be public or private, shall be designed and constructed to the standards contained in this section and in accordance with the classification of said street. 
3.  Streets, whether existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in this section. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the street framework type classifications as shown in the Street Framework Map of the City of Sandy Springs, Development Code, or as otherwise required by the Director. 
Specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to the latest specifications of GDOT, Fulton County, and the City of Sandy Springs. 
B.  Driveway intersections and access improvements.   
1.  Angle and improvements. Driveways shall generally be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 85 degrees for roadways classified as arterial or collectors and 80 degrees for all other roadway classifications unless approved by the Director. This requirement may be waived by the Director where the driveway access is to a substandard road (i.e. dirt or gravel) or a rural road section. Driveways providing access to parking lots which contain six or more spaces shall be paved in accordance with the parking lot requirements of the Development Code, latest edition. 
2.  Driveway design standards. 
a.  Driveways provide access to property and are a service to the traveling public. However, vehicles entering or leaving driveways may disrupt the flow of traffic on streets and cause accidents, thereby infringing on the rights of the public to travel the roadway. All driveways should be restricted to locations where movements into and out of them can occur in a safe and orderly manner. 
b.  Because of their simple appearance, driveways often do not receive sufficient design consideration. At the least, driveways should always be designed to eliminate or minimize opposite lane encroachment while entering and exiting property. 
c.  All driveways are to be designed and constructed with sidewalk transitions as appropriate. Cross slope shall not exceed two percent in area where sidewalk is present or is planned to be installed according to an approved sidewalk master plan, City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, Comprehensive Plan or project approved by mayor and city council. 
d.  All driveways are to be considered low volume intersections and to comply with minimum intersection/corner sight distance requirements of this section. 
e.  All driveways shall slope up from the edge of road a minimum of six inches within the right-of-way to ensure that stormwater surface flow is maintained within the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived by the Director in road sections that drain away from the gutter line, i.e. the high side of super-elevated curves. 
f.  No catch basins will be allowed within access/driveway radii (turning radii). 
g.  Where a driveway is constructed at a location that has or should have a ditch along the roadside for the purpose of collecting, channeling, and controlling stormwater runoff the driveway shall be constructed with a culvert designed to conduct stormwater beneath the driveway in accordance with the following: 
i.  Concrete or other type of culvert approved by Community Development Department; 
ii.  Sized to accommodate the 25-year storm, as a minimum, with a minimum pipe size of 24 inches. Larger storm events may be required as specified in Section 10; 
iii.  Provided with flared-end sections or headwalls at the inlet and outlet; 
iv.  Of sufficient length to accommodate a minimum of two-foot shoulders at each end of the driveway with a maximum side slope of 2:1 to the bottom of the ditch line; and, 
v.  Installed in a ditch of minimum two-foot wide flat bottom with sides sloped at a grade no greater than 2:1 stabilized with acceptable vegetation. 
3.  Residential driveway standards. Residential driveways provide a primary means of access to single-family, detached residential uses and shall conform to the following: 
a.  Width: Minimum 12 feet, maximum 16 feet within the right-of-way, as measured from edge of pavement. 
b.  Radii or flare: Minimum five feet. 
c.  The curb cut shall not encroach on the radius of the curb at a street corner. 
d.  In no case shall the edge of the curb cut be less than five feet from the side property line, as measured along the right-of-way. 
e.  Length: A minimum of 25 feet or to the edge of the city or state right-of-way, whichever is greater, shall be paved with a treated hardened surface. Rural residential driveways may be constructed with an asphalt pavement section, if approved by the department. This requirement may be waived by the Director where the driveway access is to a substandard road (i.e. dirt or gravel) or a rural road section. 
f.  Not more than two curb cuts shall be permitted on any one street frontage classified as a local street. When two cuts are permitted there shall be a safety zone of not less than 25 feet, as measured along the curb line, between the inside edges of the driveways. 
g.  Not more than one private curb cut may be located on any one street frontage for any one dwelling where the street is classified as a collector or higher order street. If a lot has access to more than one frontage, it may not have any private curb cuts on a street that is classified as a collector or higher order street. If both frontages are classified as collector or higher order streets, then the curb cut may be on the frontage with the lowest classification, or as designated by the department. 
h.  Multiple lot (subdivision) development: For developments of two or more adjoining lots, driveways shall be located outside of building setbacks and zoning buffers on all lots abutting the exterior of the project site. For lots interior to the project site (not adjacent to exterior lot lines, setbacks or zoning buffers), driveways may be located within side setbacks. 
i.  Lots previously developed as single family detached homes: Driveway locations may remain in the existing location as was previously used to access the property (regardless of zoning class); 
j.  Lots with a front building setback width of less than 130 feet: Driveway can be located anywhere within the confines of the property, provided that each lot has only one curb cut per public street; or 
k.  Lots with front building setback width equal to or greater than 130 feet: If redeveloped lot driveway may either be located in the previously used location or driveway must be located at least ten feet from side property line. Vacant lots not previously developed as a part of a platted residential subdivision: driveway must be located at least ten feet from the side property line. 
4.  Nonresidential driveway standards. Nonresidential driveways (other than single-family detached uses) shall provide uninterrupted ingress/egress to and from the site and shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  The minimum distance required is measured perpendicular from the street right-of-way line at the ingress/egress point to the nearest edge of any interior service drive or parking space with direct access to such. The length of the uninterrupted ingress/egress is determined by the maximum peak hour volume of the facility in which the driveway is provided and as shown in the table below. The developer shall provide this information. 
Table 3-1. Uninterrupted Ingress/Egress Distances 

 
b.  Nonresidential driveways shall not be designed or marked to allow more than one lane of traffic to exit onto a street simultaneously, unless such driveway is channelized in accordance with traffic engineering design principles as applicable when designing channelized street intersections. 
c.  Width (measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement): 
Table 3-2. Nonresidential Driveway Width 

 
Notes: 
[1]   Where no other access is provided a minimum width of 20 feet shall be required. 
[2]   Additional width may be approved by the Director based on an approved engineering design. 
d.  Entrance radii shall be based on the road classification at the proposed entrance location and shall conform to the requirements set forth in this section. 
e.  Composition: Within the right-of-way the driveway and access improvements shall meet or exceed the same specification as the connecting public roadway. 
f.  Drainage: Consistent with existing drainage plan of the connecting public roadway unless other improvements are required for safety, hydrological and environmental considerations. 
g.  Driveway designs other than as provided within this chapter, i.e., median divided or additional lanes, are subject to consideration of the community development director. 
5.  Access limitations for development adjacent to thoroughfares. 
a.  All access points and driveways adjacent to thoroughfares may be subject to further restriction and consideration as may be deemed necessary by the GDOT and/or the city to ensure safe, functional design and efficient operation of the thoroughfares. 
b.  Access to all residential lots shall be from interior subdivision streets or roads where possible. Exceptions are subject to approval from the Director. Subdivisions of three or less lots may be exempted upon approval by the Director with proper consideration of safety, hydrological, and environmental concerns. 
c.  If the closest intersection is or is likely to be signalized, traffic movements to and from any driveway within 250 feet of an intersection with (as measured from the point of tangency) a collector or an arterial shall be limited to right turns only. 
6.  Median openings. 
a.  No median opening shall be spaced at a distance less than 660 feet for urban roadways or 1,320 feet for rural roads from any other median opening (measured from centerline to centerline) unless specifically approved by the Community Development Director. 
b.  Other factors will also be considered, such as distance to other median openings, adjacent land use, expected traffic volumes, and the resulting volume of U-turns that are likely to occur without the median opening. Meeting the spacing criteria is not, in itself, an indication that median openings will be allowed. 
c.  All median openings shall include full width storage and taper length in accordance with Tables 3-6 and 3-7 unless otherwise acceptable to community development director based on a traffic study. Increased storage and transition lengths may be required to eliminate disruption of through-traffic flow. Provide a minimum 11-foot pavement width, excluding curb and gutter. 
7.  Spacing of signalized intersections. No signalized intersection shall be spaced at a distance less than 1,000 feet for urban roadways or 1,320 feet for rural roads from any other signalized intersection (measured from centerline to centerline) unless specifically approved by the Community Development Director. 
8.  Auxiliary lanes (turn lanes and deceleration lanes). 
a.  Improvements required. 
i.  When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed city road is to be developed or redeveloped and the city road will provide access to the property, access improvements to the city road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer. 
ii.  When any auxiliary turn lane that extends beyond the applicant property frontage, the applicant will be responsible for acquiring the necessary rights-of-way and easements in order to accomplish the necessary frontage improvements. 
b.  Deceleration lane. A deceleration lane shall be constructed at no cost to the city at each project driveway or subdivision street entrance, as applicable, that meets either the average daily traffic (ADT) or right turning volumes shown in the following table. Passing lane sections fall under the criteria for two or more lanes. The Director may require the construction of a deceleration lane even when the conditions in Table 3-3 are not met, if roadway or field conditions indicate that the safety of the general public would be improved. 
Table 3-3. Minimum Volumes Requiring Deceleration Lanes 

 
Deceleration lanes required by this section shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  Deceleration lanes shall have a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall meet the following standards for storage and taper length: 
Table 3-4. Deceleration Lane Storage and Taper Lengths 

 
ii.  Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the city at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration lane shall also be required. 
iii.  Other access improvements may be required by the Community Development Director in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public. 
iv.  The pavement specifications for deceleration lanes must comply with the GDOT standard specifications of roads and bridges, except as approved by the Community Development Director. 
c.  (3) Medians. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, the opening will be reviewed in accordance with GDOT standards, latest edition. 
d.  (4) Left turn lanes. Left turn lanes must be constructed at no cost to the city if either the ADT or left turning volumes shown in the following table are met. Passing lane sections fall under the criteria for two or more lanes. The Community Development Director may also require the addition of a right turn lane, even when the conditions in the following table are not met, if roadway geometry or field conditions indicate that the safety of the traveling public would be improved. 
Table 3-5. Minimum Volumes Requiring Left Turn Lanes 

 
Left turn lanes required by this section shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The design of left turn lanes should consider the intended function and the characteristics of the roadway. In many cases, it is necessary to widen the existing roadway to introduce the left turn lane. Left turn lanes shall be constructed at no cost to the city. 
b.  When the roadway has a median that is at least 20 feet wide, the left turn lane can be developed out of the median, avoiding the need for transitions. If a proposed driveway aligns across the main street with another driveway, and the proposed driveway must provide a left turn lane and left turn storage, then adequate storage and tapers must also be provided for the driveway across the main street. 
c.  The basic design elements of left turn lanes are illustrated in the following table. This example shows symmetrical widening, which basically requires the through traffic on each side to shift by one-half of the lane width. Some circumstances may dictate that all widening be achieved on one side, which requires a full lane shift for through traffic on the side where the additional width is developed. 

Figure 3.1: Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes
  
  
Table 3-6. Minimum Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes 

 
d.  The required length of full-width storage is based on the peak hour traffic volumes. This should be determined in the traffic study. The amount of storage is dependent on the type of traffic control in effect. For signalized intersections, the storage should be sufficient to accommodate the 95th percentile peak hour queue. At yield-controlled intersections, the storage is based on the number of vehicles as designated in Table 3-7. 
Table 3-7. Left Turn Storage Requirements 

 
9.  Relocation of utilities. The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures as may be occasioned by the required project access improvements. 
10.  Left turning control radii. The path of the inside wheels during left turns is important for the design of median openings and intersections with dual left turn lanes. The following radii shall be used for the design of entrance improvements. 

Figure 3.2: Left Turning Control Radius
  
Table 3-8. Left Turning Control Radius 

 
11.  Corner sight distance. All driveways shall provide adequate corner sight distance in accordance with the standards established for an intersection as set forth in this section. 
12.  Separation and spacing. All driveways except those serving residential units on individual lots shall be recommended to meet the following criteria: 
a.  Spacing requirements, associated with the construction of new driveways, are provided in the following Table 3-9. Driveways should be separated from any other facility, which accesses a city roadway, whether it is another driveway or a public street. Minimum spacing requirements also apply to driveways on the opposite side of undivided roadways. 

Figure 3.3: Spacing Criteria for Driveways
  
Table 3-9. Driveway Spacing Criteria 

 
Notes: 
(1) Requirements for the length of right and left turn lanes, as shown in Table 3-4 and Table 3-6, may increase the minimum allowable spacing shown in Table 3-9. 
b.  Spacing of one-way driveways. Figure 3.4 shows a typical layout of one-way driveways. The spacing criteria presented in Table 3-10 does not apply to the distance between the two one-way driveways (driveway pair). A driveway pair must be separated from another driveway pair by the distance as shown in Table 3-10. A driveway pair must also be separated from an adjacent two-way driveway in accordance with the spacing criteria in Table 3-10. 

Figure 3.4: Spacing Criteria for One-Way Driveways
c.  Placement of driveways. Not only must driveways be spaced from other driveways as provided above, they must also be located a minimum distance from the property line. The radius return must be a minimum of five feet from the property line. 
When driveways are to be jointly used by two or more property owners, the property line separation requirements given in the above paragraph can be waived. However, a joint use agreement signed by the affected property owners must be provided to the community development director. Either property owner may apply for the driveway permit. 
d.  Driveway spacing. Driveways should align with other driveways located on the opposite side of the roadway. If offset driveways cannot be avoided, the same driveway spacing criteria as given in Table 3-9 should be provided, to provide space for left turns. Figure 3.5 shows how the spacing is measured for locating offset driveways on undivided roadways. Spacing is from center to center. 

Figure 3.5: Spacing of Offset Driveways
If the city roadway involved is a divided facility and the driveways do not align with a median crossover, the driveway spacing would only apply to the adjacent driveway located on the same side of the roadway as shown above in Figure 3.5. 
e.  Maximum number of driveways serving a single project: One for each full 200 feet of property frontage. This is not meant to be a spacing standard but only an expression of the maximum number of driveways that are permitted serving a single project. 
13.  Raised islands. Raised islands associated with entrance improvements shall be designed in accordance with the standards provided herein. 
14.  Right-in, right-out driveways. 
a.  Raised islands are also typically used to channelize the movements at a driveway where only right turns are allowed. The raised island is an effective means of preventing left turns. All right-in, right-out islands must have a radius that is 70 feet, or a compound curve that approximates 70 feet. 
b.  Right-in, right-out driveways are not intended for truck traffic, so the exit and entrance lanes must be 12 feet in width as measured from face of curb to face of curb. The island must be constructed from mountable curb (three inches vertical, 45-degree face, three inches flat) to accommodate emergency vehicles. The edge of the island should be offset 18 inches to 24 inches from the edge of the travel lane. 
15.  Pavement design. 
a.  All construction, within the right-of-way, of surfaces intended for travel by motorized vehicles shall be paved. The pavement specification of auxiliary lanes on city roadways shall be the GDOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, or as designated in city standards, whichever is more restrictive. 
b.  New developments are required to widen the road along their frontage to a uniform lane width of 11 feet. If the widened area is two feet or less in width, a concrete sub-base should be provided per the current standards. The developer must then either pave the entire width of the road, or mill to the centerline and pave to match the existing road. Transitions shall be milled a minimum of 25 feet. Any deviation from this standard requires a waiver from the Director. 
16.  Pedestrian considerations. When driveways are constructed in areas where pedestrian activity is not prohibited, the design should adequately provide for pedestrian movement and interaction with vehicular traffic. Pedestrian features that should be considered include sidewalks, crosswalks, traffic control features, and curb ramps are required. The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines must be utilized where pedestrian traffic is expected. 
C.  General layout requirements.   
1.  Conformance. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform at a minimum to the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
2.  Local streets and collectors. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Collectors shall be provided to channel through traffic movements within a development, where appropriate to the design and a major thoroughfare is not proposed by the comprehensive plan. Collectors also may be provided as central routes within large residential subdivisions, where appropriate to the design, based on project traffic demands exceeding 4,000 trips per day (ADT). 
3.  Cul-de-sac streets. 
a.  Maximum length without an approved turnaround. Dead-end streets more than 150 feet in length, as measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the end of the improved access road, shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround. Alternative turnarounds may be provided as approved by the fire marshal and the Director. 
b.  Minimum street length. The minimum street length for a cul-de-sac street shall be 50 feet. 
c.  Maximum design length. Cul-de-sac streets may be no more than 600 feet in length. Additional length necessitated by topography or property configuration may be approved by the Director. 
d.  Measurement of cul-de-sac length. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured along the centerline from the point of tangency of the entrance radius to the point of curvature for the cul-de-sac radius return. 
e.  Eyebrow cul-de-sac. Eyebrow cul-de-sac (half cul-de-sac) will be allowed only at "right-angled" intersections having an interior angle between 80 degrees and 100 degrees. 
f.  Conformance to standard drawings. Cul-de-sac shall conform to the layout and dimensional requirements as shown in the standard drawings. 
g.  Cul-de-sac with landscape islands. Nonstandard cul-de-sacs will be evaluated individually and may be constructed with a landscaped island (subject to approval by the fire marshal and the Director) to be maintained by the homeowners' association in perpetuity. 
h.  Minimum cul-de-sac radius. Minimum cul-de-sac radii shall be 50 feet. 
4.  Other dead-end streets. 
a.  A dead-end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision where necessary to provide access to a land-locked abutting property, for planned continuity of future circulation, for improved access for public safety vehicles, or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring lands. Such dead-end streets shall be designed so as to allow their reasonable extension, and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. The stub street requirement may be waived by the Director, provided the fire marshal concurs. 
b.  In residential subdivisions, a dead-end ("stub") street required, under this section, to provide access to an abutting property may be exempted from construction of roadway improvements and public utilities under the following circumstances: 
i.  No lot within the proposed subdivision will gain access from the "stub" street; and, 
ii.  A concept plan has not been submitted or approved on the neighboring tract; and, 
iii.  The "stub" street shall be fully designed as part of the development plans. However, the right-of-way shall only be cleared and rough graded in accordance with the approved plans, and all disturbed areas grassed; and, 
iv.  Connections for future extension of all public utilities shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be provided to the future "stub" street roadway location, and curb and gutter shall be installed across the roadway stub at the right-of-way line (extended); and 
v.  The right-of-way for the "stub" street shall be dedicated as part of the final plat. Slope easements or construction easements, if required by the street design, shall be shown on the final plat. 
c.  Dead-end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. This requirement may be modified by the director in cases of serious topographical hardship or dissimilar zoning which would create unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead-end street, or the removal of the dead-end street back to its nearest intersection. 
d.  Where a dead-end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves more than three lots, the developer shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead-end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a final plat. 
e.  (5) Where a street dead-ends at the property boundary and the street exceeds the maximum cul-de-sac length a permanent cul-de-sac shall be required. In this situation, right-of-way to the property boundary shall be required, but the pavement shall not be extended to the property boundary beyond the edge of the paved cul-de-sac turnaround. 
5.  Service roads. 
a.  Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way or major thoroughfare, a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. 
b.  All driveways along designated thoroughfares with existing or planned service roads shall provide access to such service roads. To gain temporary direct access to the thoroughfare, the developer shall construct the section of the service road adjacent to the development. The service road section shall be located where planned. Any right-of-way not previously dedicated shall be dedicated prior to consideration of a temporary driveway approval providing direct access to the thoroughfare. 
6.  Half-streets. Half-streets (new boundary streets having one-half of the minimum required right-of-way or pavement width) shall not be allowed nor access to same be permitted should it exist. 
7.  Reserve strips. Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way which could control or are intended to control access to streets, alleys, or public lands shall not be permitted unless their control is given to the city under ownership, dedication, or easement conditions approved by the city attorney or acceptable to the Director. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. 
8.  Alleys. Alleys shall not be provided except where the developer produces evidence satisfactory to the Director of the need for same. In the event the Director approves a design which proposes alleys, the alley shall be constructed as though it were a local street pursuant to the standards contained in this chapter. 
9.  Street jogs. Streets shall be aligned as per driveways as shown on Table 3-9. 
10.  Traffic calming. Where residential streets are longer than 600 feet, traffic calming devices may be incorporated as required by the Director. The design of all measures shall comply with the applicable standards for the construction of such measures. 
11.  Bike infrastructure. When required, the developer shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way to the city, or applicable entity, and install the necessary pavement and other improvements for the construction of bicycle infrastructure in locations as may be required by the Director or Road Cross-section Standards. Bicycle lanes shall be a minimum of five feet in width as measured from the edge of pavement, not including curb and gutter, and constructed in accordance with the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, latest edition, the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, latest edition, and the NACTO Urban Bikeway Design Guide, latest edition. 
12.  Bus shelters. When required, the developer shall provide bus shelters within or adjacent to the right-of-way which are in compliance with the design standards of the local transit authority and as approved by the city. The Director may require the construction of turnout areas or widened shoulders to accommodate the loading and unloading of passengers. 
D.  Minimum right-of-way and street improvements.   
1.  Right-of-way and pavement widths. 
a.  Minimum rights-of-way for new street construction shall be as required by the Cross Section Standards database or per the City of Sandy Springs Right-of-Way Plan unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
b.  Additional street right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, realignments, sidewalks, utilities or other necessary improvements are required and minimum right-of-way standards would be inadequate to accommodate the improvements. 
c.  A minimum of ten-foot travel lanes are required on all streets, except for alleys where the principal structure may also be served by a higher classification street. Roadway widths and lane assignments are typically based upon the functional classification of said roadway, but in no case shall those widths be less eleven (11) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Director. Lane widths exclude curb and gutter. 
d.  Median divided roadways may be required with left turn bays and median breaks in lieu of center two-way left turn lanes. 
e.  Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall it be less than the required width provided herein. Where street widths change an appropriate transition shall be provided as approved by the Director. 
2.  Street rights-of-way. 
a.  Dedication of street right-of-way. Right-of-way for all public streets, existing and proposed, shall be dedicated in accordance with the street classifications as shown on the long-range road classification map of the comprehensive plan and in accordance with this chapter. Right-of-way dedications shall be made prior to the approval of a final plat or, where a final plat is not involved, prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
b.  Right-of-way for projects adjacent to comprehensive plan projects. If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the city transportation or comprehensive plans or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, permits shall not be issued until the department has submitted the project to the mayor and city council for review in order to seek a determination if the city should acquire the right-of-way or if a study of alternate routes should be undertaken. The review period by the city shall not exceed 90 days from the date of permit application. If, after the 90-day review, the mayor and city council is unable to reach a decision, there shall not be any further delay of a requested permit for this situation. 
c.  Right-of-way for projects adjacent to funded roadway projects. If a new street or thoroughfare is funded by the city or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, the proposed road right-of-way shall be incorporated into the development plans of the property in accordance with this chapter. The right-of-way requirements contained in this chapter shall govern except where there exists clearly defined plans of GDOT or the city, which require additional right-of-way. In that case, the greater right-of-way requirements shall govern. 
d.  Right-of-way for projects adjacent to designed roadway projects. Any development with property fronting on an existing city road for which there exists clearly defined plans by GDOT or the city, may be required to provide road improvements associated with the defined plans or, in lieu of the design and construction, at the discretion of the mayor and city council, the developer may be required escrow the dollar equivalency of required improvements (including curbing, utility relocation, and drainage structures), as estimated by the developer and verified by the community development director. These funds shall be deposited in the appropriate road construction account prior to the approval of development improvements or within 30 days of city award of a construction contract, whichever occurs first. 
e.  Dedication of minimum required right-of-way for abutting streets. On any existing street that abuts a property and does not meet the right-of-way requirements as established in this chapter, one-half of the required width of right-of-way shall be dedicated to the city as measured from the centerline of the roadway prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit for that property. 
f.  Location of the right-of-way. Except where it can be shown to be in the best interest of the safety, health and welfare of the general public or specifically approved by the community development director the location of the right-of-way shall be located as follows: 
i.  The right-of-way shall be parallel the back of curb or be mitered at intersections to provide adequate area for utilities, sidewalk, sight distance and maintenance of the right-of-way. 
ii.  Right-of-way shall be located a minimum of 11 feet from the back of curb or one foot from the back of sidewalk, whichever is greater, to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges and other planting or structures that may be placed on the adjacent property line at a later date. 
g.  Right-of-way setback adjacent to residentially zoned property. The right-of-way for new public streets or the easement/common area for new private streets must be located a minimum of 50 feet from any peripheral property line adjoining residentially zoned property unless inter-parcel access is required. This setback shall comply with the provisions of section for "reserve strips". 
h.  Minimum right-of-way miters. When right-of-way miters are required at intersections to provide area for adequate utility location and maintenance, the miters shall comply with the following minimum standards, the miter distances shall be measured along the right-of-way from the point of intersection of the two rights-of-way if they were extended: 
i.  Twenty-foot miters (minimum) shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of any major thoroughfare. 
ii.  Ten-foot miters (minimum) shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of any local roads. 
iii.  Intersecting right-of-way lines may be joined by an arc having the minimum radius shown, or by a miter which cuts across the right-of-way lines connecting the points where the required radius would have otherwise been tangent.). 
3.  Substandard streets. 
a.  Ingress/egress. All subdivisions and developments shall provide at least one means of ingress/egress from an improved road as determined by the Director. This condition may be waived in areas where the size of the lot or other conditions of zoning permit the development of single-family residential units to utilize a substandard street. 
b.  Substandard street improvements. In the event that a development which is not permitted to access substandard streets through a right or condition of zoning has access to a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel road), the following project access improvements shall be required: 
i.  If the abutting substandard street provides access to the development and is dirt or gravel, the street shall be upgraded by the developer to a paved roadway from the project entrance to the nearest standard paved road along the route of access. 
ii.  Off-site project access improvements, shall at a minimum, result in a full-section roadway meeting the requirements of a local residential roadway at minimum. In cases where the internal roadways have been designated as a higher classification the off-site improvements shall be designed to meet the standards of the higher classified road. Responsibilities shall be as follows: 
iii.  The Developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage and utility improvements. Where a rural road section has been approved the drainage improvements shall include all necessary drainage swales. 
iv.  All right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to the city. If the developer is unable to acquire the right-of-way, the City may initiate acquisition proceedings, at the expense of the developer, after authorization by the mayor and city council. 
4.  Improvements along state highways. For any development which abuts a state highway or other right-of-way controlled by the State of Georgia, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of GDOT or the City of Sandy Springs, with the more restrictive requirements controlling. The proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved and permitted by GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit by the Department. 
E.  Roadway design.   
1.  Street grades and design speeds. 
a.  Minimum grade. Minimum grade for all local streets shall be 1.5 percent. Minimum grades for all collector and arterial streets shall conform to GDOT practice unless noted otherwise. 
b.  Minimum grades of less than 1.5 percent on a local street may be approved by the department, based on adequate engineering designs, where at least 1.5 percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, a record drawing and such computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the street will drain in accordance with this chapter. Street sections where unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions. 
c.  Maximum grade and design speed. Minimum vehicle design speeds and maximum grades allowable in the city by street classification shall be as shown in the following table. 
Table 3-10. Minimum Design Speeds and Maximum Grades 

 
Table 3-10 Notes: 
(1) Maximum grade in excess of those listed above may be approved by the Director in order to address topographical safety, hydrological, and environmental concerns. 
(2) Grades between 12 percent and 14 percent shall be limited to a maximum length of 150 feet. The distance shall be measured as the tangent length between points of curvature. 
d.  Maximum grade for cul-de-sac. Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be six percent. 
e.  Roadway cross slope. The standard roadway cross slope is two percent down from crown to gutter line or edge of pavement. In areas where pavement width is being added to an existing street, the additional pavement shall match the cross slope of the existing roadway. 
2.  Vertical street alignment. 
a.  Requirements for vertical curves. All changes in street profile grades having algebraic difference greater than one percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=KA). 
b.  Required K values. 
Table 3-11. Constant (K) Values For Vertical Curves 

 
c.  Minimum vertical curve length. The minimum length of vertical curve required for safe stopping sight distance shall be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", latest edition. 
3.  Horizontal street alignment. 
a.  Minimum horizontal curves and superelevation. All new streets shall adhere to the following standards governing horizontal curvature and super elevation: 
Table 3-12. Horizontal Curves 

 
Notes: 
(1) No super elevation will be allowed on collectors internal to residential subdivisions. 
b.  Calculation of superelevation: 
Superelevation for horizontal curves shall be calculated utilizing the following formula: 
R= v 2 /(15 (e + f) ) where: 
R = minimum radius curve 
v = vehicle design speed (MPH) 
e = rate of super-elevation (decimal of a foot rise per foot roadway) 
f = side friction factor 

 
c.  Super-elevation when widening existing streets. Widening section along existing streets shall be designed reflecting existing curvature and super elevation, if any, unless the existing street has been included in a specific design by the city or GDOT which calls for different standards, in which case the project will be coordinated with the overall design. 
d.  Super elevation runoff. Roadway edge curves shall be provided for tangent run out (bringing edge from a normal crown to centerline elevation) and super elevation runoff (from the end of tangent run out to the point of design super elevation) in accordance with design standards of GDOT or other professional engineering standards. 
e.  Tangents and compound curves. Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be not less than the minimum centerline tangents shown in Table 3-15 unless otherwise specified by GDOT. Compound radii curves are prohibited. At least the "desirable" length shall be provided unless hardship conditions of topography or property configuration will not allow lengths greater than those shown as "minimum." For compound circular curves that cannot be avoided, the ratio of the flatter radius to the sharper radius shall not exceed 1.5 to 1. 
Table 3-13. Tangents 

 
4.  Horizontal and vertical clearances. 
a.  Horizontal clearances. 
i.  Shoulder width. A shoulder of no less than 11 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, appropriately graded and having gentle slopes of not more than 0.5 inch per foot and rounded cross-sectional design shall be maintained along all streets. Beyond the shoulder but within the right-of-way, slopes shall not exceed one foot of rise for each two feet of horizontal distance on a cut slope, and one foot of fall for each three feet of horizontal distance on a fill slope. 
ii.  Clear zone. Experience has shown that motorists occasionally run off the roadway and providing a traversable recovery area can lessen serious injury. AASHTO publishes a Roadside Design Guide that should be used as a reference when designing driveways. 
iii.  The following table provides the clear zone distances as contained in the Roadside Design Guide. Driveways must be designed so that all areas within the roadway right-of-way have clear zones as defined in the following table. 
Table 3-14. Clear Zone Distances (Refer to AASHTO Roadside Design Guide, latest edition) 

 
Notes: 
* Clear zones may be limited to 30 feet. 
** Fixed objects should not be present in the vicinity of the toe of these slopes. The width of the recovery zones should consider a number of factors including right-of-way availability, economic factors, safety needs, and accident history. 
All areas located within the clear zones should remain clear of obstructions such as bridge abutments, poles, trees, etc. If obstructions are unavoidable, the design should include appropriate protection such as break-away design, guardrail installation, safety end treatments on culverts, etc. The Roadway Design Guide includes a table for horizontal curve adjustments, where the clear zone correction factor is applied to the outside of curves only. Curves flatter than a 2,860-foot radius do not require an adjusted clear zone. 
iv.  Increased clear zone in certain locations. At selected locations, such as the outside of a sharp curve, a wider clear zone with greater horizontal clearances to any roadside obstruction may be required. 
v.  Removal of obstructions. The community development director, in accordance with Georgia Law 32-6-51 and this development ordinance, is authorized to remove or direct the removal of any sign, signal, device, or other structure erected, placed, or maintained on the right-of-way of a public road which because of its nature, construction, or operation, constitutes a danger to, or interferes with the vision of, drivers of motor vehicles. 
b.  Vertical clearances. Vertical clearance for all overhead obstructions shall be at least 16 feet over the entire roadway width. 
Additional clearance may be required for obstructions over railroads, state or federal roadways or other transportation routes. 
F.  Street intersections.   
1.  Angle of intersection. The angle of roadway intersections shall be consistent with the requirements for driveways as set forth in this section. 
2.  Intersection approaches: horizontal alignment. 
a.  New local streets which approach an intersection with a street in a category higher than itself on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius less than 240 feet shall provide a tangent section of roadway at least 30 feet long. Collectors approaching an intersection with a major thoroughfare on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius of less than 550 feet shall also provide the 30 ft. tangent section. The tangent length shall be measured along the centerline of the street, from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street, extended, to the point of tangency with the centerline of the curve section. 
b.  New major thoroughfares shall provide tangent sections at intersections with streets in equal or higher categories as needed to provide adequate stopping distances at their design speeds. 
3.  Intersection approaches: vertical alignment. 
a.  Approach landings internal to residential subdivisions. For approaches to intersections internal to a residential subdivision, a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding five percent shall be provided for a distance of not less than 25 feet as measured from the back of curb of the intersecting. 
b.  Approach landings at local streets. For new street intersections with local streets, a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent shall be provided for a distance of not less than 50 feet as measured from the back of curb of the intersecting street. 
c.  Approach landings at collectors or arterials. As a street approaches an intersection with a collector or arterial, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding two percent and for a distance not less than the following minimums: 
Table 3-15. Approach Distances at Major Intersections 

 
Notes: 
(1) Distance of the approach is measured from edge of pavement of the intersecting street to the point of curvature in the approaching street. 
4.  Intersection radii. 
a.  Intersection radii for roadways as measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall be as follows. The minimum roadway radii for the intersection of local and nonresidential local streets is 25 feet. For all other roadway classifications, the minimum roadway radius is 40 feet. When a local or residential collector intersects a higher classification of roadway, the radii shall be a minimum of 40 feet. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at an angle of less than 90 degrees; or when vehicle and operating circumstances dictate. As approved by the Director, the radii can be reduced a maximum of five feet for the following reasons: 
i.  Separation from street, or 
ii.  Removal of obstruction. 
b.  Intersecting right-of-way lines may be joined by an arc having the minimum radius shown, or by a miter which cuts across the right-of-way lines connecting the points where the required radius would have otherwise been tangent.). 
5.  Islands. 
a.  Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the standard drawings. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way, except traffic regulatory devices and other infrastructure erected or approved by the city. No island shall be approved which contains less than 100 square feet for median islands or 50 square feet for corner islands. 
b.  Islands with the right-of-way or access easements shall be constructed with mountable curb sections per GDOT specifications, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
c.  Islands are an important form of intersection channelization that is often needed to prohibit undesirable movements, define the paths of allowed movements, and provide a refuge area for pedestrians. Any location where two outbound lanes are proposed for a driveway at an un-signalized location, the right line must be for right-out only movement, and separated from the other lane by a raised island. 
d.  Painted lines are an effective means to direct the paths of vehicular movement. However, raised islands are more effective during times when visibility is reduced. When islands are to serve as pedestrian refuge areas, they should be constructed as raised islands. All sign posts to be placed within concrete area must have hole through pavement structure. The hole may be either formed, drilled or sawed. 
e.  When multiple crosswalks are required to pass through islands, the required size may exceed the 100 square feet mentioned above. The additional area may be required to install wheelchair ramps. As an alternate to ramps, the pedestrian travel way can be "slotted" through the island, remaining on the grade of the roadway. 
f.  Raised islands should be offset from the edge of the adjacent travel lane on all sides. The amount of offset shall be a minimum of 18 inches as measured from the edge of the travel lane to the face of the curb. When raised islands are adjacent to roadways with posted speed limits of 50 MPH or greater, the island shall be offset from the edge of the roadway by a minimum distance of ten feet. 
6.  Intersection corner sight distance. 
a.  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. Using traffic control measures to meet intersection sight distance requirements shall not be allowed, with the exception of roundabouts or signals with the Director's approval. 
b.  The minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," Chapter 9 (Intersections), latest edition. Intersection sight distance is determined with an assumed height of driver's eye of 3.5 feet and an assumed height of object of 3.5 feet when measuring in the vertical plane. When measuring in the horizontal plane, the intersection sight distance is determined with an assumed driver's eye location from a point four feet offset from the centerline and 15 feet from the edge of closest travel lane to a point along the centerline of the closest oncoming travel lane: 

Table 3-16. Minimum Corner Sight Distance 

 
Notes: 
(1) SDL refers to "Sight Distance to the Left" and SDR refers to "Sight Distance to the Right." 
(2) Minimum corner sight distance for stopped passenger vehicles turning onto a roadway with no median and grades of three-percent or less. Distances shall be adjusted for entering roadways with different design characteristics. 
7.  Obstructing visibility at intersections. On any corner lot, within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a line (miter) joining points on such lot lines located at a distance of 20 feet from the point of their intersection, the following shall apply: 
a.  There shall be no fence or wall or hedge higher than three feet. 
b.  There shall be no obstruction to vision, other than a post or column or tree (except standards erected by city) exceeding one foot in greatest cross-sectional dimension, between a height of three feet and a height of 15 feet above the established grade of either of the intersecting streets. 
c.  The Director may require additional restrictions based on the horizontal or vertical curvature of the roadway or any unique design features of the intersection. 
8.  Turning lanes at intersections. Left turning lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, classified as a collector or higher, intersecting a major thoroughfare, and may be required in other locations to meet traffic demand and safe operations. Right turning lanes may be required to meet traffic demands or safety concerns. When provided, turning lanes shall meet the criteria for turn lanes in this section. 
SECTION 4 - STREET CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
A.   Pavement Design 
1.  All construction, within the right-of-way, of surfaces intended for travel by motorized vehicles shall be paved. The pavement specification of auxiliary lanes on city roadways shall be the GDOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition or as designated in city standards, whichever is more restrictive. 
2.  New developments are required to widen the road along their frontage to a uniform lane width of a minimum of 11 feet. If the widened area is two feet or less in width, a concrete sub-base should be provided per the current standards. The developer must then either pave the entire width of the road, or mill to the centerline and pave to match the existing road. Transitions shall be milled a minimum of 25 feet. Any deviation from this standard requires a waiver from the Director. 
3.  If no road widening is required, the developer may be required to: 
a.  Pave the entire width of the road, or 
b.  Mill to the centerline and pave to match the existing road, 
if the existing pavement conditions or damage during construction of the development dictate the necessity, as determined by the Director. 
B.   Sub-grade preparation for all streets. Street construction shall be done in accordance to GDOT or the City of Sandy Springs standards, latest edition with the more restrictive requirements controlling. 
1.  Preparation. Sub-grade preparation shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications and this chapter. 
2.  Unsuitable material. If any sections of the sub-grade are composed of topsoil, organic, or other unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and then thoroughly compacted as specified for fill or stabilized with stone or a geo-textile or geo-grid as approved by the director. 
3.  Compaction. Fill shall be placed in uniform, horizontal layers not more than six inches thick (loose measurement). Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 100 percent maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO method T-99. 
4.  Utility installation. After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage, water, and sanitary sewer utilities have been installed within the right-of-way as appropriate, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
5.  Compaction testing. Utility trenches cut in the sub-grade shall be backfilled as specified herein. Compaction tests at the rate of one per 150 feet of trench may be required to verify compaction. 
6.  Proof-roll. The sub-grade must pass roll testing with a fully loaded tandem axle dump truck prior to placement of the base material. With the approval of the department, a geo-textile or grid may be used to stabilize a sub-grade that does not pass proof rolling. 
7.  Use of roads as construction roads. When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of stone (except crusher run) shall be laid as a traffic surface. This material shall not be used as a part of the base material. It may be worked into the sub-grade, or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
8.  Temporary drainage. Provisions shall be made to drain low points in the road construction when the final paving is delayed. A break in the berm section is required when the curbing has not been constructed. After installation, drainage under the curb to side slopes is required, using minimum four-inch diameter pipe sections. 
C.   Base preparation for all streets. 
1.  Crushed stone base. 
a.  Base preparation shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications and this section. 
b.  Base course thickness shall be in accordance with this section. 
c.  Lay one course to a maximum depth of eight inches. If the required depth exceeds eight inches construct two or more courses of equal thickness. Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 100 percent maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO method T-180. 
D.   Prime Coat 
1.  If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the developer or the city, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for seven days prior to paving. 
2.  Prime coats may also be required for cement or lime stabilized bases or sub-bases, regardless of pavement thickness. 
3.  Prime coats shall not be applied to a wet surface, in air temperatures less than 40 degrees Fahrenheit in the shade or if rain is imminent. 
E.   Soil cement base 
1.  If the base material (resident soil) is unsatisfactory to the city then a soil cement mix design with engineer test results acceptable to the city. The design must come from a geo-technical firm with the results certified by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Georgia. The tests required for the design are ASTM D558 or AASHTO T134 or ASTM D559 and/or 560 or ASHTO T135 and 136. 
2.  The minimum base course shall consist of at least six inches of suitable soil (high mica content not suitable) stabilized with ten percent of Portland cement by volume (approximately 42.3 pounds per square yard). Where the grade of the street is five percent or greater, a single surface treatment course must be applied before the binder. 
F.   Paving standards for all streets 
1.  Asphalt streets. 
a.  Asphalt paving installation shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications, latest edition and this section. Asphalt paving shall not be installed directly on the sub-grade. A graded aggregate base shall be installed in accordance with these and GDOT specifications, latest edition for all asphalt paving sections. 
b.  All pavement sections shall be designed by a qualified, registered professional engineer based on the 20-year projected traffic loads for that section. The minimum acceptable pavement sections shall be defined as follows: 
Table 4.1. Minimum Construction Standards (1) 

 
Notes: 
(1)   Unless otherwise specified by City of Sandy Springs or GDOT. 
(2)   Binder Course shall consist of 4 inches (25 mm) Superpave base and 2 inches of 19 mm Superpave binder. 
c.  Concrete streets. The design and construction of the street shall comply with GDOT standards. Use of concrete streets requires the approval of the Director. 
SECTION 5 - CURB AND GUTTER 
A.  General Requirements   
1.  Curb and gutter required. All new streets and access improvements shall be provided with curb and gutter except where approved for a rural road section by the city. All areas approved for use of the rural road section shall provide appropriate roadside drainage facilities designed in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as adopted by the city. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. 
2.  Alternative curb and gutter design. Alternative curbing designs such as rolled back or vertical curbing without a gutter may be approved by the Director when such designs are deemed appropriate for the type of development proposed. 
3.  Standard Curbing. Only standard curb and gutter shall be used along any classified street. Header curbs may be used along medians when roadway drainage is directed away from the median. Mountable curbs shall not be used along pedestrian or bicycle facilities, along on-street parking or at the end of stub-roads. 
B.  Local and Collector Road Curbing. Local and collector road curbing shall meet the following requirements:   
1.  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by GDOT) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be 6" x 24" x 12"(GDOT 24" Type II). 
3.  Vertical curbing only, except where specific approval has been granted by the Director for an alternate curb design. 
C.  Arterial Curbing. Arterial curbing shall meet the following requirements:   
1.  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by GDOT) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be 8" x 30" x 14" (GDOT 30" Type II). 
3.  Vertical curbing only, except where mountable has been specified and approved by the Director. 
D.  Construction Methods.   
1.  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade, horizontal be field staked, and finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the frontage of a road which the city or GDOT has identified for resurfacing within one year of the new construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed one foot above the project access improvement pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely affected. 
2.  Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor on grade less than two percent and over 12 percent, and within 100 feet in both directions from all low points. 
3.  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
4.  Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
5.  Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. 
6.  Demolition of existing curb and gutter shall be by saw cut only where existing curb and gutter will abut to new curb and gutter. 
SECTION 6 - ACCESS 
A.  Maximum Number of Lots with a Single Entrance. A maximum number of 50 residential dwelling units shall be allowed to be constructed with only one street outlet to an existing public street. If a second access to an existing public road is not available or, in the opinion of the Director, could induce nonresidential traffic through the development, a single entrance may be allowed if designed with a traffic signal and/or sufficient right-of-way and improvements to provide a protected left-turn lane, subject to the approval of the community development department.   
B.  Access Improvements. When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed city road is to be developed or redeveloped and the city street will provide access to the property, access improvements to the city road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer as required in both the Development Code and the Cross Section Standards.   
C.  Documentation Required for Alternative Designs. In the event that an alternative is suggested by the applicant, studies and reports conducted by professionals currently certified in the State of Georgia will be required to be submitted to and approved by the department. These studies and reports must clearly relate to the desired results and purposes expressed or implied in the applicable performance standard. Once an alternative has been approved by the department, it shall become a required standard applicable to the specific approved permit only.   
SECTION 7 - SIGNAGE AND STRIPING 
A.  Traffic Control Devices. Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided by the developer at no cost to the city. All devices shall be installed prior to the approval of a final plat, or where no final plat is required, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All devices shall be MUTCD standard devices.   
B.  Signing.   
1.  All signing and pavement marking must be designed and installed in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
2.  All signposts to be placed within concrete area must have six-inch wide diameter space through substructure. The traffic control signs must be installed per the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) with relation to the installation height, size, distance from curb, etc. In general, signs should be installed at least seven feet but no more than ten feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign, and at least two feet from the face of curb to the closest edge of the sign, or as required by the MUTCD. 
3.  The signs shall be new die cut anodized aluminum (at least .080 inches thick) with a corner radius no smaller than one and a half inches and installed on a single square post with standard hardware. This post should be installed to break-away standards with a slip base. The face of the sign shall be Type III (high-intensity) sheeting or better. If the road intersects a state route, all warning signs, red series regulatory signs, including Stop, Yield, and Do Not Enter signs shall be fabricated from Type VI (Wide Angle Prismatic) reflective sheeting. No two signs shall be mounted on the same post. 
4.  As part of the land disturbance permit process, the department of community development will identify the number and location of signs. The minimum sign installation shall conform to the standards established below. 
5.  The applicant will be responsible for maintaining the signs from installation to final inspection. The city reserves the right to replace stop or yield signs if they have been down for more than 12 hours, to replace any regulatory signs if they have been down for more than seven days, and to replace any other signs if they have been down for more than 14 days. This will be done at the cost to the applicant of $250.00 per sign. 
6.  The sign inspection shall be done by the department of community development prior to acceptance of the final plat or as established by the director of community development. The signs shall be included in the right-of-way surety at the same time as the pavement at a cost of $100.00 per sign or as established by the director of community development. If the city needs to replace any signs at the time of the final inspection, the value would be forfeited. 
7.  The following signs shall be installed in all new subdivisions as applicable. Additional signs may be required by the Director. 
a.  STOP Signs (R1-1). The STOP sign shall be installed on the right side of the approach to which it applies. Stop lines, when used to supplement a STOP sign, should be located at the point where the road user should stop. Where there is a marked crosswalk at the intersection, the STOP sign should be installed in advance of the crosswalk line nearest to the approaching traffic. 
STOP signs should be installed in a manner that minimizes the numbers of vehicles having to stop. In most cases, the street carrying the lowest volume of traffic should be stopped. A STOP sign should not be installed on the major street unless justified by a traffic engineering study as recommended by the MUTCD. If two streets with relatively equal volumes and/or characteristics intersect, typically the direction that conflicts the most with established pedestrian crossing activity or school walking routes or the direction that has the longest distance of uninterrupted flow approaching the intersection should be stopped. 
No all-way stops may be installed in a new subdivision without the permission of the Director. 
b.  Yield Sign (R1-2). Yield signs shall be installed when there are right turns at an intersection that are channelized apart from the through and/or left turn movements with a striped or raised island. In addition, yield signs should be installed on each approach of a roundabout. 
c.  Speed Limit Sign (R2-1). Speed limit signs shall indicate a 25 mph speed limit for streets internal to residential subdivisions, unless it is a nonresidential local or collector road for the development, and then it should be no higher than 35 mph. For neighborhood settings, only one speed limit sign shall be installed at each project entrance or at the points of change from one speed limit to another. This sign should be installed no less than 100 feet from the entrance of the subdivision, but no greater than 500 feet from the entrance. 
d.  Street Name Sign (D3-1). Ground-mounted street name signs shall be installed, on their own pole, at every intersection and shall conform to MUTCD, latest edition. Overhead street name signs shall be installed where a subdivision street intersects at any traffic signal. Street name signs for public roads shall be green and street name signs for private roads shall be blue. The letters must be white with a height of at least eight-inch upper-case letters and at least six-inch lower-case letters. The letters should be in "Standard Highway Series E(M)"" font or as approved by the public works department. The street name sign shall be a combination of lower-case letters with initial uppercase letters. If the street has no outlet, a "No Outlet" legend should be put on the end of the street name sign blade closest to the main road. The "No Outlet" legend should have at least three-inch high all-capital black letters on a yellow field that is no more than eight inches wide. 
The street name sign should be constructed on flat blades and not extruded blades. They may be either riveted back-to-back or two-sided at the applicant's preference. 
e.  Roundabout Sign. Roundabouts must be signed and marked per GDOT standards. This includes yield signs for every approach, as well as an advance roundabout sign as established by the public works department. The pavement marking shall include yield lines and channelization islands for each approach. 
f.  Stop Ahead Sign (W3-1) and Yield Ahead Sign (W3-2). The Stop Ahead and Yield Ahead signs shall be installed on an approach to a primary traffic control device that is not visible for at least 250 feet. Please refer to Section Tables 2C.29 in the MUTCD for additional information. 
g.  Playground Sign (W15-1). Playground signs shall be installed on any vehicular approach to an amenities area. 
C.  Sign Information and Sizes. All signs shall be of the sizes as designated in the following table. This table also included the appropriate reference sections of the MUTCD which explain the proper use and installation of each of the signs previously designated.   
Table 7-1. Sign Information and Sizes 

 
D.  Conformance with MUTCD. All traffic signals and signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or this section (no decorative traffic control devices will be allowed without approval of the Director).   
E.  Striping Requirements.   
1.  Any street with a speed limit of 35 mph or greater that is impacted by the construction of a development shall be restriped. A stop bar and 50 feet of double yellow centerline will be required to supplement every stop sign impacted by the development. Striping shall be accomplished in accordance with GDOT standards and the MUTCD. 
2.  Pavement markings are required to separate lanes of travel and should be used along all edges of pavement. The following guidelines are provided for designing and installing pavement markings for driveways: 
•  All pavement markings installed within the public right-of-way on asphalt surfaces shall be thermoplastic material; 
•  Lane lines are generally five inches (white); edge line striping is required where curb and gutter has been installed, unless a waiver is granted by the Director. 
•  Stop lines shall be 24 inches (white); 
•  Center lines shall be five inches double yellow; 
•  Deceleration and left turn lanes shall have turn arrows (Type 2) spaced every 100 feet and "ONLY" legends between every pair of Type 2 Arrows; 
•  Crosswalks shall use the current GDOT standard. 
F.  Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices, Signing, and Striping. Any traffic control devices, signing, or striping installed on private property during the development process or as shown in the approved permits shall be maintained in acceptable and operational condition through perpetuity. Any such item that is damaged or no longer in compliance with the current standards must be replaced. 
SECTION 8 - SIDEWALKS & MULTIUSE TRAILS 
A.  Sidewalk Design and Construction Standards. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this section. The Director is authorized to grant modifications upon specific application, as well as alternative design proposals after receiving a recommendation from staff.   
1.  All sidewalks required under this section must be installed and the construction accepted by the Director prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for any building or structure on any affected parcel. 
2.  All sidewalks shall conform to AASHTO, latest edition and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, latest edition and to all applicable overlay district guidelines and standards. 
3.  Sidewalks are required to be represented on design plans and development plans and installed in accordance with such plans along the total property frontage on public streets as required by the Director. 
4.  Width. 
i.  Sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide on internal subdivision streets and abutting external streets. 
ii.  Multiuse trails and side paths shall have a minimum width of twelve feet or as directed by AASHTO. 
iii.  If the street is part of an approved sidewalk, pathway or transportation plan, then the width and location of the sidewalk shall conform to the requirements of the approved plan or as approved by the Director. 
iv.  Wider sidewalks or multiuse trails shall be installed by the developer as required by the Director or Cross Section Standards. 
5.  Shoulder. 
i.  Sidewalk and multiuse trails shall be provided with a minimum graded shoulder width of two feet. 
ii.  A five-foot graded shoulder may be required to support alternative uses, including but not limited to, equestrian activities and mountain bikes. 
6.  Transitions. Where new sidewalks tie in to existing sidewalks of a different width or where the proposed sidewalk must change width then the transition shall be made in a gradual manner at a rate of 5:1. 
7.  Noncompliant sidewalks. In all areas where the condition or design of the sidewalk and curb ramps do not conform to this chapter or is otherwise deemed unsatisfactory, the existing sidewalk shall be removed and replaced in conformance with this chapter. 
8.  Landscape strips. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be located at least two feet from the back of curb or as directed by the Cross Section Standards. 
b.  In areas where a setback from the curb cannot be provided due to unusual site conditions, the Director may approve the installation of the sidewalk at the back of curb. In these areas the sidewalk width may be increased to allow a minimum of four feet of clearance from any portion of an obstruction that must be located adjacent to the roadway, i.e., mailboxes, etc. 
c.  Where the Director has determined a practical difficulty exists, the sidewalk is installed no closer than the edge of the road or the back of the curb. 
9.  Meandering sidewalks. Where trees or other conditions exist, the Director works may permit the sidewalks to meander in the right-of-way or into the lot where the permit is being sought. Meandering sidewalks may be approved by the Director where necessary to avoid obstructions in the right-of-way that may otherwise be too costly to relocate or in compliance with the standard details. If sidewalk meanders outside the existing right-of-way, right-of-way dedication or sidewalk easement shall be required. 
10.  Cross slope. Sidewalks shall be constructed with a maximum cross slope of two percent or as required by ADA. Sidewalks shall not exceed this cross slope at driveway crossings. 
11.  Material. 
i.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches thick. Concrete shall be Class "B" (as defined by GDOT) with a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
ii.  Alternate materials may be required in special overlay or historic districts. 
12.  Final stabilization. Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed or landscaped. 
13.  GDOT controlled roads. Sidewalks located in the right-of-way of roads under the jurisdiction of GDOT shall be constructed in accordance with GDOT design and construction standards. 
14.  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all roads and driveways, except for roads/driveways serving 3 lots or less of single family residences. 
B.  Sidewalk Curb Ramp Design and Construction Standards.   
1.  Handicapped accessible curb ramps with detectable warning strips shall be provided at street intersections in accordance with GDOT design and construction standards, with the exception of Type C, which shall not be allowed. 
2.  All curb ramps shall be provided with detectable warning strips that comply with state and federal ADA specifications. 
3.  Color of detectable warning strip shall be terracotta (not yellow). 
4.  Installation method shall be per GDOT standards using cast in place mats instead of adhesive installation. (A cast in place mat has anchors on the back of the mat, which is installed prior to concrete curing). Stamped concrete tactile or brick insert tactile shall be allowed with the approval of the Director. 
5.  Drainage at curb ramps shall be designed to avoid ponding within or flooding of the pedestrian path. 
C.  Damage Repair. Damage to sidewalks and ramps caused by construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the city within 30 days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier.   
D.  Payment in Lieu.   
1.  The Director may authorize a payment to the city in lieu of installation of the required sidewalk if: 
a.  The Director determines the topography of the road frontage or other exceptional condition is such that a special hardship exists on the property. Hardships do not include the lack of an existing sidewalk network, traffic volumes, or travel speeds. 
b.  A development is within the project limits of a designed and funded capital improvement project that will install sidewalk or streetscape, the developer may pay in lieu of building the required sidewalk. All certificates of occupancy will be temporary until project closeout. 
2.  Where the Director determines that a hardship exists, the payment in lieu of installation of sidewalk shall be determined by the Director on a per linear foot per length of public road frontage. 
3.  Funds received pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in an account of the city and restricted to use for the installation of sidewalks. 
SECTION 9 - LIGHTING AND UTILITIES 
A.  Pedestrian Lighting   
1.  A lighting plan, drawn to scale, shall be provided for all city roads where pedestrian lights are required or proposed. At minimum, the plan shall include the following: 
a.  Layout design - the developer shall submit a lighting layout to the Community Development Department for approval. This layout shall include: 
i.  Location of proposed lights and light fixture type; 
ii.  Conduit layout and service point; 
iii.  Location of any existing adjacent street or pedestrian lighting; 
iv.  Distance to the nearest major intersection(s); 
b.  Spacing - the required spacing for pedestrian lighting is 90 feet unless otherwise specified. If two or more lights are to be installed, place at least one Type C Intersection Lighting Fixture at each intersection or driveway, unless adequate lighting exists from adjacent existing pedestrian lighting fixtures. If this causes excessive lighting, this requirement may be waived by the Director. 
2.  Installation - install lights as per City of Sandy Springs Decorative Lighting Specifications 
a.  Use Type C Intersection Lighting Fixtures at roadway intersection and non-residential driveways. 
b.  Use Type A Mid Block Lighting Fixtures in all other locations. 
3.  Payment for installation and operation. 
a.  The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of required pedestrian lighting including any fees or charges assessed by the power company. Proof of payment shall be provided prior to the approval of the final plat. 
b.  The developer shall submit proof of payment for materials and installation to the City and coordinate with the power company to submit the lighting lease agreement to the City for operation and maintenance. 
B.  Street Lighting   
1.  Street lights shall be provided by the developer in all new subdivisions which propose the construction of a new street to be dedicated to the city or which propose lot access to existing city streets. 
2.  A lighting plan, drawn to scale, shall be provided for all city roads where street lights are proposed. At a minimum the lighting plan shall include the following: 
a.  Layout design. The developer shall submit a lighting layout to the Community Development Department for approval. This layout shall include: 
i.  Location of proposed lights and light fixture type; 
ii.  Location of any existing adjacent street or pedestrian lighting; 
iii.  Distance to nearest Major Intersection(s); 
b.  Spacing. The minimum spacing for street lighting is 250 feet. 
c.  Fixtures. In order to provide uniform lighting, the following bulb and fixture types shall be used for providing street lights in the public rights-of-way. 
i.  Minor Street: 150 watt flat glass cobra head of type High Pressure Sodium, Metal Halide, LED or as otherwise approved by the power company 
ii.  Collector: 250 watt flat glass cobra head or mongoose of type High Pressure Sodium, Metal Halide, LED or as otherwise approved by the power company 
iii.  Arterial: 400 watt flat glass cobra head or mongoose of type High Pressure Sodium, Metal Halide, LED or as otherwise approved by the power company 
d.  Monthly utility costs. The developer shall pay the monthly operation costs of said streetlights until such time as one-half of the units are occupied and the maintenance bond, if required, has expired, unless waived by the public works director due to unusual circumstances. 
e.  Design criteria. Street lighting design criteria for all residential streets shall conform to the design standards given in Section 20 of Illuminated Engineering Society Handbook, latest edition. 
f.  Lighting for developments other than subdivisions. For all developments outside of the right-of-way where site lighting is required, those sites shall conform to the outdoor lighting regulations in the city zoning ordinance. 
3.  Payment for installation and operation. 
a.  The developer shall pay the power company for all costs associated with the installation of street lights. Proof of payment shall be provided prior to the approval of the final plat. 
b.  The developer shall submit proof of payment for materials and installation to the City and coordinate with the power company to submit the lighting lease agreement to the City for operation and maintenance. 
4.  Street lighting for residential streets. 
a.  Recommended illumination. The recommended illumination for all residential streets shall be 0.5 horizontal foot candles or 0.5 lumens per square foot of the roadway pavement when the illuminating source is at its lowest output. 
b.  Minimum illumination. The lowest foot candle value at any point on the road pavement shall not be less than one sixth of the average value, i.e. maximum to minimum ratio of 6:1. 
c.  Luminary light distribution. The classification of luminary light distribution shall be IES distribution type MS III. 
d.  Mounting height. The following mounting heights with reference to output of lamp and type of lighting pattern is recommended: 
i.  Vertical light distribution M = medium 
ii.  Vertical light control S = semi cut off or cut off 
iii.  Lateral light distribution Type III 
Table 9.1. Street Light Mounting Height 

 
Notes: 29-foot mounting height shall only be used in areas with existing overhead wiring. 
e.  Luminary spacing. The spacing of the luminary shall be governed by factors such as location of utility poles, block lengths, property lines and geometric configurations of the terrain features. 
f.  Mounting poles. 
i.  The mounting poles shall be as per latest regulations and standards of national electric code, the national electric safety code, the American National Standards Institute and NEMA. The basic design criteria required is resistance to 100 mph winds including 1.3 gust factor. 
ii.  All poles shall be black fiberglass or as recommended by the utility company. 
iii.  The pole top shall have a top tenon of three inches o.d. so as to fit a slip fitter. 
iv.  The poles shall have hand hole 4" x 12" openings with an aluminum cover fitted to two SS pentahead screws. The center of handhold opening shall be approximately 24 inches from ground level. 
g.  Luminaries. Luminaries shall be fitted with built in ballast and photoelectric control and shall conform to meet all the requirements of latest regulations and standards of EEI and NEMA depending upon the lamp load and type and circuit voltage. 
h.  Wiring and cabling. All wiring and cabling shall conform to the appropriate utility company's specifications. 
C.  Mailboxes   
1.  All mailboxes, whether installed on public or private streets, shall comply with the United States Postal Services standards for the construction of mailboxes. 
2.  The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the curbside mailbox. 
3.  Lateral placement of the mailbox shall be no more than six inches from the face of the curb or edge of pavement if no curb and gutter is present) as defined by USPS installation requirements. In no case shall the face of the mailbox extend out over the face of the curb or edge of pavement if no curb and gutter is present. 
4.  All mailboxes must be breakaway design. Concrete block, solid, or brick construction is prohibited. 
5.  The location and installation of cluster box units shall be approved by the Director prior to installing the units. 
6.  Monument-type mailboxes shall not be installed within any sight triangles for intersections or driveways. 
D.  Water System and Fire Hydrants   
1.  The developer shall install or have installed a system of water mains connected to a public water supply system in accordance with these requirements and those of the authority having jurisdiction to provide water service within the city, herein referred to as the water authority. 
2.  All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be designed in accordance with the policies, standards, plans and specifications of the city and the water authority. 
3.  Water mains and appurtenances shall be installed after installation of the curbs and gutters and before paving, or as approved by the city and the water authority. 
4.  Fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502-85 for dry-barrel fire hydrants and the following requirements: 
a.  Hydrants shall be traffic type with safety flange that allows the valve to remain closed when the hydrant is broken or damaged above or near grade level. 
b.  The design of hydrant shall be of the compression type with main valves and "O" ring seal between the operating nut and the bonnet. 
c.  Hydrant color shall be silver. 
d.  Hydrant inlet shall be six-inch, mechanical joint with harnessing lugs. 
e.  Hydrant main valve opening shall be 5¼ inch. 
f.  Valve seats shall be bronze to bronze. 
g.  Operating nut shall be solid Pentagon, 1½ inches measured flat at point (31/32 on side). Operating nut shall turn counter clockwise to open. 
h.  Hydrant shall have two 2½-inch diameter and one 4½-inch diameter nozzle. Nozzles threads shall be the standard adopted by NBFU. Nozzles shall all have gasketed caps fitted with chain. 
i.  The following fire hydrants are approved for installation in the city, other models may be acceptable when dedicated to and approved by the utility provider: 
Table 9.2 Acceptable Fire Hydrant Models 

 
j.  Materials shall conform to AWWA Standard C-502, latest revision. 
5.  Water mains and fire hydrants on private property and subdivisions. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter water mains installed on private property and within subdivisions shall also comply with the following requirements: 
6.  Water main size. 
a.  Water mains of at least eight-inch pipe shall be installed; six-inch pipe may be used only where it completes a gridiron and then only up to 600 feet in length between interconnecting mains of approved diameter, unless otherwise approved by the Director and the fire marshal. 
b.  No main line smaller than eight inches shall serve more than one fire hydrant and automatic extinguishing system or one fire hydrant on any dead-end main more than 300 feet in length. All water mains shall be sized in accordance with NFPA 24, as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
7.  Fire hydrant spacing. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 500 feet apart, with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to comply with the requirements of the International Fire Code and Appendices as adopted by the city and approved by the fire marshal. 
8.  Clearance around fire hydrants. A minimum of three feet of clearance shall be provided around all fire hydrants. 
9.  Water main material. Water mains shall be of ductile iron or copper or a type listed for this service by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and approved for use by the water authority. 
10.  Minimum cover. Water mains shall be installed at least 12 inches below the frost depth. In areas where frost is not a factor the water main shall be installed to a minimum depth of 30 inches below grade. When the water main is installed under a driveway it shall be installed 36 inches below grade or 48 inches below railroads. 
11.  Hydrostatic testing. Water mains shall be hydrostatically tested at not less than 200-psi or 50-psi greater than the system working pressure, whichever is greater, and shall maintain that pressure, ± 5-psi, for two hours in the presence of a representative of the city. Pressure loss shall be determined by a loss in gauge pressure or visual leakage. 
12.  Fittings and valves. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the fire department. Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. 
13.  Timing of installation. Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed, under water pressure and ready for fire fighting before any construction with combustible material begins on-site. 
14.  Dead-end mains. In no case shall dead-end mains exceed 600 feet in length for main sizes less than ten inches. 
15.  Sub meters. When not in conflict with the requirements of the local water authority the city may require sub-metering of individual units where a project may contain multiple tenants. 
E.  Sanitary Sewer Disposal   
1.  Connection to an approved sanitary sewage disposal system shall be made, which may require the construction of an on-site system or the extension of public sanitary sewerage and associated appurtenances, as required by Fulton County. 
2.  All sanitary sewer construction shall conform to the requirements of Fulton County. 
3.  Septic tanks and tile drain-field sewerage disposal systems may be required to be located outside of the 100-year floodplain, stream buffers and impervious setbacks as required by the Fulton County Health Department and city ordinances. 
4.  The health department may require a notation that certain lots must meet additional requirements prior to issuance of a building permit, or otherwise limit development relative to health department regulations. 
a.  Such lots may include lots upon which adequate depth to water table must be demonstrated during the appropriate season of the year, adequate percolation tests must be performed, limitations upon the number of bedrooms in a dwelling, etc. 
b.  No lot shall be included on a final plat which the health department is not confident will meet all health department regulations at a reasonable cost or within a reasonable period of time, except lots proposed to be served by sanitary sewer in subdivision where "dry" sewer has been installed. Such lots shall be noted: "Approval by Fulton County for connection to sanitary sewer required prior to issuance of a building permit." 
c.  Where applicable, approval of the sanitary sewer system by Fulton County may be required prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
d.  Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer is required by the service provider, no new street shall be paved without the sanitary sewer being first installed. 
F.  Separation of Water and Sewer Lines. There shall be no physical connection between a drinking water supply line and a sewer or appurtenance.   
1.  Horizontal separation. Water lines shall be laid at least ten feet horizontally from a sewer or a sewer manhole whenever possible; the distance shall be measured outside edge-to-outside edge. When local conditions prevent a horizontal separation of ten feet, the water line may be laid closer to a sewer or sewer manhole provided that the bottom (invert) of the water main shall be at least 18 inches above the top (crown) of the sewer. Where this vertical separation cannot be obtained, the sewer shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe and pressure tested in place without leakage prior to backfilling. 
2.  Vertical separation. The water line shall be laid in separate trenches or on an undisturbed earth shelf. Where possible the water main shall pass over the sewer main with a vertical separation of at least 18 inches. When local conditions prevent a vertical separation of 18 inches between the bottom of the water main and the top of the sewer the following construction standards shall be used: 
a.  The sewer shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe and pressure tested in place without leakage prior to backfilling. 
b.  Adequate structural support for both the water and sewer mains shall be provided to prevent settling and excessive deflection of the joints. 
c.  That length of sewer main shall be centered at the point of the crossing such that the joints shall be equidistant from the point of crossing. 
d.  No deflection of the joints is permitted within ten feet of the point of crossing. 
G.  Easements   
1.  Drainage easements. 
a.  Temporary construction easements and permanent easements for drainage shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with this chapter when said easement is deemed to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare. The city shall not be responsible for any easements that are not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city. All easements shall be stabilized in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
b.  Drainage easements are required for any part of the drainage system which is designed to carry stormwater runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed. 
c.  Drainage easements for improved ditches, pipe construction, and detention facilities shall be cleared, opened, and stabilized at the time of development to control surface water runoff. Runoff slope and side slopes shall be specified by the developer's engineer, according to good engineering practice, this chapter and the applicable provisions provided in the stormwater management design manual. 
d.  Drainage easements for storm drain pipes shall be provided according to the minimum requirements found in the table below. The minimum easement width shall be 20 feet when no other parallel utilities are located therein. For pipe sizes not shown on the table below the easement width shall be based on the pipe diameter (span) plus two feet, plus two times the pipe invert depth. This value shall be rounded up to the nearest five feet. For pipes exceeding 16 feet in depth, a pre-submittal conference shall be held with the city to determine what additional requirements may be required. 
Table 9.3 Easements for Storm Drain Pipes 

 
2.  Common easements. A common easement for sanitary sewer and drainage purposes may be allowed if the pipes are parallel and at least ten feet is provided between pipes (outside of pipe to outside of pipe). The easement width shall be equal to the width shown in the table in section 103-96(a) plus the distance separating the pipes (minimum of 10 feet). 
3.  Drainage easements for surface drainage. Drainage easements shall be provided where a development is traversed by or contains a watercourse, impoundment, detention facility, improved channel, floodplain, natural stream or channel. It shall conform substantially to the flooding limits of the 100-year storm based on fully developed conditions per the land use plan, but shall be no less than 20 feet in width. 
4.  Obstruction of drainage easements. 
a.  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the final plat. The property owner will be required to keep the easement free of obstruction in such a way as to assure the maximum designed flow at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drainage improvements without the prior written approval from the city. Structures, except driveways, shall not be constructed or erected in an easement without the prior written approval from the city. Driveways shall cross an easement as close to perpendicular as practical. Property owners may plant landscaping in an easement that is piped with the approval of the city. Some landscape materials, such as large trees or shrubs, may not be appropriate for use within the easement; the city is not responsible for replacing the landscape material located in the easement when it is removed to maintain the drainage system. 
b.  No retaining wall, building, pole, sign or other vertical structure shall be constructed in storm sewer easements, including vehicular easements around facilities without approval from the Director. No fence shall be placed across storm sewer easements without gates to which the city or representatives of the city have full access. No planting shall take place within the easement that will impede access along the easement or endanger the pipeline. No other pipeline or utility shall be placed in the easement without approval by the Director. 
5.  Stabilization of drainage easements. All drainage, sewer, access or other easements which were required to be cleared shall be fine graded, seeded and mulched immediately upon the completion of construction work or if any significant delay is anticipated in the completion of the work. The use of sediment control measures may be required to protect the area until a comprehensive vegetative cover is obtained. 
6.  Placement of fill in drainage easements. No fill shall be placed on a storm sewer easement without approval from the Director. All manholes must extend to the ground surface but shall not impede access where the drainage easement is intended to provide for vehicular access. All easements terminating on a parcel shall extend to the property line. 
7.  Sanitary sewer easements. Permanent sanitary sewer easements shall be no less than 20 feet in width when no other parallel utilities are located therein or as required by the sanitary sewer authority. When warranted, temporary construction easement widths shall be determined by Fulton County. 
8.  Potable water easements. Permanent water easements shall be as required by the water authority. 
H.  Street Cuts   
1.  Review of utility plans. All utility construction plans within city right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the department before construction begins. A traffic control plan may be required as part of the submittal. Street cuts shall not be allowed unless deemed absolutely necessary due to the presence of rock, the need to tap into an existing line beneath the road surface, or other circumstance which makes boring impossible or infeasible. Where open trenching has been permitted the trench width shall be the minimum width necessary to allow for the installation of the conduit and provide adequate compaction of the backfill material. 
2.  Marking of existing utilities. All existing utilities shall be properly marked in accordance with Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act prior to any excavation work. 
3.  Maintaining access to private properties. Access to private driveways shall be provided at all times except during working hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access. 
4.  Obstruction of fire hydrants. Unobstructed access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants. 
5.  Lane closure. Contact the public works department at least 24 hours in advance of closure of traffic lanes. The applicant will be responsible for ensuring notice has been received by public works and should utilize verified e-mail notification. All lane closures shall be properly marked and signed with certified flagmen when appropriate. In trenching across the road, no more than one-half of the traveled way is to be closed to traffic at one time. 
6.  Maximum length of open trench. The trench construction shall not be opened for a distance of more than 300 feet at any one time, unless specifically authorized by the public works director. 
7.  Damage repair. Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, sidewalk or driveway is broken or damaged by the person making any excavation or opening in or under any street, alley or public place, the entire block, square or section, shall be removed to the score, groove or saw cut line and replaced or reconstructed. Where the line of cut would be less than two feet from an existing expansion or weakened plan joint, the concrete shall be removed to said joint. 
8.  Trench construction and backfill. 
a.  Definitions and considerations. In trenched construction, bedding is the subgrade soil and its surface, as prepared to support the pipe. Backfill is the material refilling the rest of the level of top of pipe, and of overfill above that level. The latter may include restoration of surface soils or roadway materials. From the highway viewpoint, the essential features for trench and backfill construction are: 
i.  Entrenched roadbed, 
ii.  Security of the pipe against deformation likely to cause leakage, and 
iii.  Assurance against drainage being blocked by the backfill. Bedding is important for all pipes. 
b.  Controls for trenched construction. Trenched construction, bedding, and backfill normally will be adequately controlled by the applicant conforming to the GDOT standard specifications for earth work and culverts as well as standards and details. Specific controls follow: 
i.  Trenches are to be cut to have vertical faces with a maximum width of two feet or outside diameter of pipe plus 18 inches. They shall be shored where necessary to prevent caving and sloughing. 
ii.  Bedding shall be provided to a depth of 12 inches or half of the diameter of the pipe, whichever is the least. Bedding shall consist of granular soil free of lumps, clods, cobbles and frozen materials, and shall be graded to a firm-but-yielding surface without abrupt changes in bearing value. Unstable soils and rock ledges shall be sub-excavated from the bedding zone and replaced by imported material. For carriers laid without encasement, the bedding shall be shaped to fit the bottom of the pipe for 60 percent of its width. See the GDOT Standard Specifications for additional information on backfill material. 
iii.  Backfilling of trenches must be accomplished immediately after the pipeline or other utility is placed therein or as directed by the director. Backfill shall be placed in two stages: first, sidefill to the level of the top of pipe; second, overfill to former surface grade. Sidefill shall consist of granular material laid in six-inch layers, each consolidated by mechanical tamping and controlled addition of moisture, to a density of 95 percent as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 or GHD. 
c.  Overfill shall be layered and consolidated to match the compaction. The top 12 inches shall be compacted to 100 percent of specified density. Consolidation by saturation or ponding will not be permitted. Use 57 stone material or another GDOT type II material that is approved by the Director in wet trenches, these materials shall be compacted like above stated backfill to a satisfactory uniform density as directed by the director. 
9.  Pavement cuts. No open cuts in pavement will be permitted except by special permission of the director when there is an emergency and the public health or safety is imperiled, or for making a service tap on a line under the pavement when no other distribution line is available in the area where the service is required. In no event will an open cut be permitted when it is reasonably practical to bore, tunnel, etc., under the surface of the highway. Whenever the director is requested to authorize an open cut, such request must be made in writing supported by detailed reasons some other method is not practical and giving details relative to the maintenance history and service life of the facility. The department requires: 
a.  That backfill and repaving be performed under its direction at the expense of the applicant, and 
b.  That the applicant remain liable for cost of repair if the backfill subsides or the patched pavement fails. When approval of the director is granted, the following provisions shall be strictly adhered to: 
i.  The trench edges in paved areas shall be sawed or cut to neat lines by methods satisfactory to the director before starting to break the pavement slab. 
ii.  Materials and methods of shall be adopted to achieve prompt restoration of traffic service. 
iii.  In trenching across the highway, only one-half of the paved surface is to be opened at one time. The open half shall be completely backfilled before opening the other half. 
iv.  Closure of intersecting streets, road approaches, or other access points for trenching operations will not be permitted. Upon trenching across such facilities, the applicant shall utilize steel running plates, planks or other satisfactory methods for traffic entering or leaving the highway or adjacent properties. Immediately after the facility authorized by the permit has been placed, the intersecting streets, road approaches or other access facilities, shall be restored to at least as good condition as it was prior to the permit operations and in a manner satisfactory to the director. Spot resurfacing, (milling, grinding and/or additional asphalt) may be required. 
v.  Once the pavement is cut, it is most difficult to reconstruct to obtain the structural strength and surface quality the road and pavement had prior to cutting. For trenches over four feet wide, the subbase, base and paving shall be replaced in kind using construction procedures in accordance with the current GDOT Standard Specifications. For trenches up to four feet wide, the subbase, base and paving shall be replaced in kind using construction procedures in accordance with GDOT standard number 1401; except Class A GDOT concrete will be used in place of Class B or soil cement base and 9.5 mm or 12.5 mm superpave asphalt will be used or as determined by the director. Utility cuts in Portland cement concrete pavement are discouraged by the department. Pavement cuts, when allowed will require complete or partial slab replacement. The director will determine the extent of slab replacement on a case-by-case basis if an open cut is allowed. Procedures for slab removal and replacement will use construction procedures in accordance with the current GDOT Standard Specifications and standard number 1401, also including but not limited to surface tolerance requirements set forth in the current GDOT Standard Specifications. 
vi.  Any pavement cuts that are not perpendicular to the roadway's horizontal alignment for asphalt highways shall require the entire width of the roadway to be resurfaced with a minimum of two inches of asphalt that is the same material as the existing surface or as determined by the director in addition to the requirements stated hereinbefore. Any pavement cuts that are not perpendicular to the roadway's horizontal alignment for Portland cement concrete pavement shall be in accordance with the current GDOT Standard Specifications and standard number 1401. Any manhole or valve shall have a square concrete pad placed around the facility if the facility is located in the traveled way as determined by the director and to the satisfaction of the director. 
c.  Sidewalk and curb cuts and replacement. All sidewalk and curb cuts require that the section of sidewalk and/or curb be replaced from existing joint to existing joint or as determined by the director. All sidewalk and curb construction shall meet the construction requirements as shown in section 441 of the current GDOT Standard Specifications or as determined by the director. 
d.  Replacement of cuts in unpaved streets. 
i.  The trench shall be backfilled in accordance with the manner prescribed in this article for backfilling of trenches. The surface treatment shall match that of the existing road. For gravel roads the trench shall be backfilled up to and within four inches of the street level. The remaining four inches shall be filled up with No. 2 crushed stone, well compacted into place. 
ii.  The base stone shall be kept at street level by the contractor until final acceptance of the project of the city engineer without additional cost to the city. 
e.  Contact the public works department for public utility extension information from the existing utility locations to the proposed development. 
I.  References   
1.  American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (2003). A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. Washington, DC. 
2.  American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (2006). Roadside Design Guide. Washington, DC. 
3.  Federal Highway Administration (2001). Highway Design Handbook for Older Drivers and Pedestrians (FHWA Publication No. FHWA-RD-01-103). Washington, DC. 
4.  Federal Highway Administration (2003). Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. Washington, DC. 
5.  Georgia Department of Transportation (2001). Standard Specifications Construction of Transportation Systems. Atlanta, GA. 
6.  Institute of Transportation Engineers (2002). Transportation and Land Development (ISBN No: 0-935403-68-X). Washington, DC. 
SECTION 10 - GRADING AND DRAINAGE 
A.  Erosion Control   
1.  Design standards. The procedures and requirements of the soil erosion and sediment articles of the Development Code, as may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable whenever any land disturbance is proposed to occur which requires a permit to be obtained by this chapter and shall continue to apply until the project has been completed. 
2.  Abandoned projects. Any project, whose permit has lapsed shall immediately have all disturbed areas stabilized. This responsibility shall fall upon the owner, developer, contractor, or any and all other responsible parties involved in the land disturbance activity. 
3.  Rules and regulations governing any land-disturbing activities not specifically exempted. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit and BMPs, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and/or minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
a.  Proper erosion control measures must be installed along site boundaries prior to stripping of vegetation, regarding, and other development activities as deemed by the director to minimize erosion and prevent soil erosion from leaving the site. 
b.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
c.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to minimum erosion potential. 
d.  Natural vegetation that is beyond the permitted limits of land disturbance is retained, and whenever feasible, natural vegetation is retained, protected and supplemented. 
e.  Disturbed soil is stabilized by the close of each business day for utilities, and within five to ten days of initial land disturbance for other commercial/residential sites. 
f.  Temporary vegetation or mulching is employed to protect all exposed areas (especially steep cuts and/or banks, etc.) during development. 
g.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures are installed upon achieving final grade. 
h.  Sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, sediment barriers, construction exits or similar BMPs as outlined in the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this section, and the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
i.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
j.  In cases where cuts and fills endanger adjoining properties, sound engineering practices or methods are employed to protect those adjoining properties. 
i.  All slopes are stabilized immediately and shall remain so for a period of no less than one year from the issuance of the project's final certificate of occupancy and/or the recording of a final plat. 
ii.  All slopes greater than or equal to 3H: 1V must be permanently stabilized with structural or vegetative BMPs. 
iii.  A plan must be submitted to demonstrate that all slopes associated with fill/cut sections have been adequately designed to be stabilized structurally (such as retaining walls) or with vegetation (erosion mat/blanket, tree bark mulch, etc). Such analysis, reports, or design shall be prepared and approved by a certified design professional. 
k.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels. 
l.  Migrated soil materials or soil materials displaced by mechanical means from land- disturbing sites to adjacent watercourses, such as lakes, ponds, streams and creeks, etc., must be remediated. The remedial work is conducted as per a remedial plan approved by the city. 
m.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of temporary or permanent bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, those such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
n.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified by city regulations. 
B.  Earthwork   
1.  Clearing and grubbing. 
a.  The area within the typical grading section shall be cleared of all trees, brush, stumps, logs, grass roots, vegetable matter, poles, stubs, rubbish, refuse dumps, sawdust piles, and all other matter resting on or protruding through the original ground surface or appearing or being placed on the area within the typical grading section before final acceptance of work. 
b.  This item also includes the removal and proper disposal of all the debris or any obstructions not to be salvaged such as fences and incidental structures within the proposed area to be graded, which might interfere with construction. 
c.  Clearing and grubbing operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent damage to existing structures, equipment and any proposed work that has been completed, and to provide for the safety of workmen and other personnel on the job site. 
2.  Grading. 
a.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved plan. 
b.  Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of not more than two feet. 
c.  A grading plan showing building pad locations may be required to be submitted for residential subdivisions to ensure adequate lot-to-lot drainage. The grading plan may be used as a construction document prior to approval of the final plat or as a guidance document for individual lot grading after approval of the final plat. 
d.  Grading plans shall outline the areas which are required to remain undisturbed, i.e. tree protection areas, undisturbed buffers stream buffers, etc., and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed around such areas. 
e.  Shoulder sections shall be provided as required in Section 3. 
f.  If the proposed grading is within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the grading shall be consistent with the river corridor certificate approved for the project. 
g.  Grading for all roads and improved ditches shall be shown. 
h.  Unclassified excavation consists of all roadway and drainage excavation, regardless of the nature of the material or the manner in which it is removed. It includes the removal and disposal of unsuitable or unstable material under the roadbed section and backfilling with suitable materials. 
i.  All rock and boulders in the roadbed shall be excavated to a depth of at least 12 inches below the sub-grade and the space backfilled to the correct grade with material suitable as sub-grade. 
j.  Where materials unsuitable for foundation or roadway purposes occur within the limits of the roadbed and front slopes, the same would be excavated to the bottom of their depth and removed. 
C.  Embankments   
1.  All depressions below the ground surface containing water shall be drained, unsuitable material removed and filled with suitable material and compacted to the ground surface before the embankment proper is begun. Any area deemed jurisdictional under federal, state or local ordinances and regulations shall obtain required approvals or permits prior to any land disturbing activities in those areas. 
2.  The entire area upon which the embankment is to be placed shall be plowed, scarified and finely broken up to a depth of at least six inches and all cleavage plains shall be destroyed before the embankment is begun. 
3.  The embankment material shall be deposited and spread in uniform horizontal layers not to exceed six inches thick for the full width of the cross sections and the layers shall be kept level by any approved equipment. 
4.  Each layer shall be compacted at moisture content proper to permit the compaction specified below. Material containing too much water shall be dried to the correct moisture content. If the material is too dry, water shall be added and uniformly mixed with the soil before it is compacted. 
5.  The top 12 inches of embankment shall be compacted to at least 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO method T-99. Embankment material located between one foot and six feet below the top of the embankment shall be compacted to at least 90 percent of maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO method T-99. The measurements of depth as described above shall begin at an elevation equal to the bottom of sub-grade treatment where sub-grade treatment material is used. 
6.  Maximum slope in cut or fill sections shall be 3:1. The slope of cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill unless benching is approved by the city. 
7.  Some soils exhibit a low shearing resistance and a low cohesiveness. These soils typically are micaceous silts and sandy soils with little or no clay. The slope shall be stabilized at 3:1 or by using such mechanical methods as needed (such as retaining walls or "grow mats" stapled in place) to maintain slope, height, and integrity. 
8.  When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the city engineer and only under the following conditions: 
a.  When accompanied by a certification from a registered professional geotechnical engineer stating that the slope material is stable; and, 
b.  In no instance shall the slope face be steeper than vertical 1/8 -inch batter is preferred; and, 
c.  The slope face is free from all deleterious material and is not subject to long-term erosion due to excessive runoff on the face of the slope. 
9.  All slopes steeper than 2.5:1 and greater than ten feet in height shall be hydro-seeded and covered with GDOT approved wheat straw, wood fiber matting or coconut fiber matting. All slopes must be protected until a permanent vegetative stand is established and, 
10.  Slopes over 20 feet in height shall be stabilized in stages by matting and vegetation. Stabilization measures shall be placed in vertical increments not to exceed 20 feet immediately at the completion of each 20-foot lift. 
D.  Retaining walls   
1.  General requirements. 
2.  When permanent grades are proposed to be steeper than 3:1 (one vertical foot of rise for every two feet of horizontal displacement) an appropriate retaining structure shall be designed to reinforce or retain the resulting embankment. 
3.  An engineered design may be substituted for the reinforced concrete design if approved by the director. All structural components of the wall shall meet the minimum building codes for the proposed use. 
4.  All wall designs must demonstrate complete dimensions for line and grade. Wall design will consider foundation drainage and select backfill material for the proposed conditions. 
a.  Permits required. Where retaining walls are to be installed permits shall be obtained. 
b.  Indemnification/certification. For all retaining walls over four feet in height, the owner of the property containing the proposed wall shall complete an owner's indemnification agreement. For all retaining walls over six feet in height, a professional engineer shall design and certify the wall and complete an engineer's certification agreement for each wall permitted. 
c.  The following criteria (contained on indemnification/certification agreements) pertain to all walls unless specifically allowed under variance or permission from the appropriate governing authority: 
i.  Retaining walls, including footings, must be located three feet outside the public right-of-way; 
ii.  Placement of retaining walls shall comply with any and all applicable easement restrictions; 
iii.  Retaining walls are to be located within the confines of owner's/applicant's property; 
iv.  Retaining walls shall not be located within undisturbed stream buffers and impervious surface setbacks, floodplains, drainage easements or drainage ways in a manner that impedes the flow of water. 
d.  Retaining wall height and materials. 
i.  All retaining wall structures in excess of six feet shall be designed by a qualified registered professional engineer and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or other masonry materials as required by the registered professional engineer. 
ii.  When the necessity for an earth retaining structure is required for a vertical displacement of six feet or less, appropriate landscaping timbers, or approved equal, may be employed if no permanent structure is supported by the soil retained by the retaining wall. The use of railroad cross ties or other timber product will only be allowed in these instances when the wall is constructed as per detail. 
e.  Handrails. All retaining walls, other than for a stormwater facility, over six feet must have a hand rail or other suitable barrier installed. See this section for requirements of handrails within the stormwater facilities. 
f.  Tiered retaining walls. Where an assemblage of retaining walls and slopes result in a vertical elevation difference exceeding four feet over horizontal distance that is less than two times the vertical elevation difference, then a retaining wall permit shall be required, along with applicable indemnification/certification agreement. 
g.  Encroachments. Walls shall be located in such a fashion as to not encroach upon existing or proposed drainage easements, drainage courses, buffers or floodplains or to encumber the natural flow of surface runoff of stormwater. Walls shall be located at a distance from such watercourses to allow for anticipated future maintenance of the easement to prevent a safety hazard to the maintenance workers or to jeopardize the structural integrity of the wall. 
h.  Walls for stormwater facilities. Retaining walls that are proposed for the purpose of a stormwater detention must be designed to demonstrate that the walls are capable of a hydrostatic load as measured from the top of the foundation footing to the highest elevation along the top of the wall. The hydrological design must allow for a free board dimension of one foot and an emergency overflow capacity equal to the allowable peak discharge for the 100-year storm event. The routing calculations should not take into account the existence of the emergency overflow. Place the overflow device above the projected 100-year flood elevation within the detention area. 
Where the walls are located within a fenced stormwater facility no handrails shall be required along the top of the wall. Where no fencing of the facility has been required and the wall exceeds four feet in height (as measured from top of wall to normal water level or pond bottom for dry facilities), a handrail or other suitable barrier, approved by the director, shall be provided along the top of the wall. 
E.  Culverts   
1.  Drainage improvements required. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Design criteria—General. 
a.  All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer. 
b.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with this section and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, latest edition. 
c.  The USGS method shall be used where applicable to check the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual are used. 
d.  All portions of a stormwater conveyance system with drainage areas falling within the same size category shall be analyzed using the same methodology. 
e.  Runoff coefficients used for the rational method and runoff curve numbers used for the SCS method shall be consistent with those shown in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
f.  Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer as per accepted standard design procedures, subject to approval by the director. 
g.  All storm drainage designs shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and GDOT specifications, latest edition. 
h.  GDOT standards shall be used in determining class (concrete) or gauge of pipe under fill, method of backfilling and pipe installation. 
i.  A certification of the pipe specifications for each pipe may be required prior to the pipe installation. 
j.  Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with GDOT specifications, OSHA standards and city ordinances, latest edition. 
3.  Design criteria—Culverts. 
a.  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross an open stormwater conveyance system, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of an acceptable grade of pipe. 
b.  Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in this chapter and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control conditions. 
c.  The 100-year ponding limits at and upstream of the culvert shall be shown on the development plans and on the final plat (if applicable). 
d.  Single-barrel or single-cell culvert structures are less prone to clogging and require less maintenance than multi-barrel or multi-cell installations and should therefore be used whenever feasible. 
e.  The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal culvert for the 100-year flow shall be 15 fps (feet per second). Velocities over 10 fps in a pipe of any material shall be considered a special design with particular attention required to pipe or structure invert protection and to fill slope, stream bed, and stream bank stability. 
f.  The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
g.  Minimum culvert size shall be 18 inches. 
h.  Culverts shall have head walls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. 
i.  The 100-year pond limits at the upstream end of the culvert shall be indicated on the design plans and final plat if applicable. 
j.  Culverts shall be designed to provide a minimum of 1.5 feet of freeboard between the peak design storm elevation and the centerline of the road without raising the established flood elevation on the upstream properties. All crossings shall conform to the floodplain management ordinance. The design storm events are as follows: 
Table 10.4-1. Required Storm Events for Culvert Design 

 
* For streets that don't have alternative access routes the design storm event shall be the 100-year event for all street classifications. 
k.  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of GDOT standards and shall be provided with a metal manhole frame and lid for access. 
l.  Minimum cover is one foot between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of culvert. 
m.  A minimum of 0.5 foot between underground utilities and exterior crown of the culvert shall be provided. 
4.  Materials and installation. 
a.  Acceptable pipe materials shall be as follows: 
i.  Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP) - required within the right-of-way or when conveying live streams; 
ii.  Fully Coated or Aluminized Type II Corrugated Metal Pipe; 
iii.  Other materials as approved by GDOT. 
b.  Pipe installed within the right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe and the class as determined by GDOT specifications. 
c.  All pipes carrying live streams shall be reinforced concrete or HDPE. HDPE pipe shall conform to the standard GDOT specifications. 
d.  Reinforced concrete pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AASHTO M-170 and/or ASTM C76. All pipes shall be in joint lengths of not less than eight feet. All joints shall be bell and spigot and shall be laid with the spigot end pointing downstream. All joints shall use an O-ring gasket conforming to ASTM C-443. Class of pipe and wall thickness shall be accordance with GDOT standard details and specifications. 
e.  Metal pipe shall be fully bituminous coated or aluminized type II, with re-rolled ends and bands to match. 
f.  Culvert pipe on which the coating has been bruised or broken either in the shop or in shipping or which shows defective workmanship shall be rejected. Among others, the following defects are specified as constituting poor workmanship and the presence of any or all of them in any culvert pipe shall constitute cause for rejection: 
i.  Uneven laps; 
ii.  Elliptical shaping; 
iii.  Variation from a straight centerline; 
iv.  Ragged or diagonal sheared edges; 
v.  Loose, unevenly lined or spaced rivets; 
vi.  Poorly formed rivet heads; 
vii.  Unfurnished ends; 
viii.  Illegible brand; 
ix.  Lack of rigidity; 
x.  Bruised, slated or broken coating; 
xi.  Dents or bends in the metal itself. 
g.  Field joints shall be made with coupling bands of the same base metal as the culverts. The bands shall not be less than seven inches wide for diameters of eight inches to 30 inches, inclusive; not less than 12 inches wide for culverts with diameters 36 inches to 60 inches inclusive and not less than 24 inches wide for culverts with diameters greater than 60 inches. Such bands shall be so constructed so as to lap on an equal portion of each of the culvert sections to be connected at the ends by galvanized angles having minimum dimensions of 2" × 2" × 3/16 ". The seven-inch band shall have at least two galvanized bolts not less than ½-inch in diameter. The 12-inch band shall have three and the 24-inch band shall have five half-inch bolts. Other equally effective methods of connecting the coupling bands may be used if approved by the director. 
h.  The gauge of the culvert metal will be determined from the thickness of the galvanized sheets as approved by GDOT Standards. 
i.  Corrugated metal pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M36, sizes, shapes, types, base metal, gauges; bituminous coating and paved inverts shall be as provided in the GDOT specifications or a directed by the Director. 
j.  All joints and couplings shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Each end of each pipe to be joined by a coupling band shall have minimum of two annular corrugations. Bands shall be manufactured from the same material as the pipe. The minimum band gauges for aluminized pipe shall be as specified in AASHTO M-36, Section 9. 
k.  Pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands fastened by two or more bolts shall join the sections. The space between adjoining sections shall not be more than the width of one corrugation. 
l.  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may accrue due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
F.  Bedding and Backfill   
1.  General. All approved pipe material shall be bedded in accordance with the manufacturers' and engineers' specifications. 
2.  Bedding. All pipes shall be placed on stable earth of fine granular foundation, the characteristics of which would be expected to provide long-term stability. In all live stream pipe installations, areas of low bearing capacity, solid or non-uniform foundations, where rock is encountered at the foundation level, or in other locations where conditions warrant, a minimum of six inches of crushed stone bedding is required (maximum size of stone is three inches). Geogrids or geotextiles may also be required by the department in problem areas. 
When concrete pipe is used all bedding material shall be suitably excavated to allow for the bell and uniformly support the pipe. 
3.  Backfill. Backfill on all pipe installations shall be constructed using foundation backfill material Type I or Type II as specified in Sections 812.2.01 and 812.2.02 respectively in the GDOT Standard Specifications. These materials shall be placed in layers of not more than six inches loose. Compaction of these materials shall be accomplished by hand tamping or machine tamping. Required compaction levels are as follows: 
a.  Backfill within all street rights-of-way shall be compacted to 95 percent maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO Method T-99. The top 12 inches shall be compacted to 98 percent maximum density. Base material shall be compacted to 100 percent maximum laboratory dry density as determined by AASHTO method T-180. 
b.  Backfill in all other areas shall be compacted to 95 percent maximum density using the AASHTO Method T-99. 
G.  Pipe End Treatments   
1.  Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts and at the end of all piped collection systems. Headwalls are to be pre-cast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced footings or poured in place reinforced concrete with reinforced footings. 
2.  End treatments that conform to the slope may be masonry, pre-cast concrete, metal, reinforced concrete slope collars or grouted riprap. Concrete and metal flared end sections shall conform to GDOT standards. 
H.  Bridges Bridges shall be designed on a 100-year flood basis. Bridge piling shall be driven to state highway load standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by registered professional engineer. 
I.  Pipe collection systems   
1.  General requirements. 
a.  The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal pipe system for the design flow shall be 15 fps. Velocities over ten fps in a pipe of any material shall be considered a special design with particular attention required to pipe invert protection and the ability of the receiving waterway or detention facility to accept the flow without damage. 
b.  The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Design Manual, latest edition. 
c.  The maximum allowable slope for a concrete drainage pipe shall be ten percent, for a corrugated metal pipe shall be 14 percent and for a HDPE pipe shall be 14 percent. Greater slopes may be approved if installation is in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. In cases where the slope is in excess of ten percent, anchor collars may be required. 
d.  Drop inlets and junction boxes shall conform to Fulton County or GDOT construction standards. 
e.  Catch basins and/or drop inlets shall be designed by the developer's engineer or registered surveyor to GDOT standards and subject to approval by the director. 
2.  Methodology. The rational method shall be used to determine the size of all pipe collection systems in accordance with the methodology provided in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Closed storm drainage systems shall be designed using the 25-year storm event. 
3.  Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches. 
4.  Inlet location and gutter spread. 
a.  Catch basins shall be located at low points of streets and at all points where the gutter spread exceeds one-half of the width of the travel lane or eight feet whichever is smaller. Flows shall be based on a 25-year design storm event and shall be calculated as described in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Gutter spread calculations shall be included in the stormwater management study. 
b.  Junction boxes or inlets shall be provided at all changes in pipe grades, direction or materials. All junction boxes or inlets shall be provided with metal manhole frames and lids for access. 
5.  Pipe slope. All storm sewer pipes shall be sloped to provide a minimum velocity of 2.5 fps, actual velocity. In no case shall the slope be less than one percent for corrugated metal pipe or one-half percent for reinforced concrete pipe. 
6.  Flow and outlet velocity. Maximum flow velocity, actual or full flow, is 20 fps. Maximum outlet velocity, actual or full flow, is five fps with adequate energy dissipation devices installed at the pipe outlet. 
7.  Hydraulic grade line. Complete flow, velocity, and hydraulic grade line computations shall be provided for all portions of a closed drainage system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm drainage profiles for the 25-year design storm event. Hydraulic grade line calculations shall include any tail-water or backwater effect from downstream structures. 
8.  Easements. Easements shall be required as provided in article XII. 
9.  Cover. Minimum cover shall be 12 inches on all drainage pipes, as measured from the bottom of the sub-grade or sub-base if used. Maximum cover shall be as defined in GDOT Specifications. 
10.  Maximum pipe length. Maximum continuous runs of pipe shall be as follows: 
Table 10.5-1. Maximum Continuous Pipe Length 

 
11.  Subdrainage. Subdrainage may be required to be installed to control any surplus groundwater by intercepting seepage or by lower or regulating the groundwater level where such conditions exist. 
a.  Backfill. The backfill around and over storm sewer pipes, culverts and minor structures shall be of selected material Type I or Type II. The backfill shall be placed and compacted so as to avoid unbalanced loading and to avoid placing undue stress on the structure. Backfill shall be built up in horizontal layers not more than six inches thick and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by the use of rapid striking mechanical tampers or hand tampers. After compaction, the dry weight per cubic foot for each layer of backfill shall be at least 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot. Backfills shall be built up and compacted above pipe and culverts to a thickness of at least two feet or half the vertical inside diameter of the pipe, whichever is greater, unless these dimensions exceed the proposed height of embankment, in which case the backfill shall be made and compacted to the height of the embankment. 
b.  Outlet location—Culverts and pipe systems. 
i.  Outlet structures (such as headwalls) shall not be located closer to the project site's property line than the distance necessary to construct any outlet protection or a flow distance equal to six pipe diameters, whichever is greater. For noncircular conduits, the distance equal to six pipe diameters shall be six times the rise dimension of the conduit. The design of the outlet protection shall be in compliance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
ii.  The invert elevation of a culvert or pipe outlet shall be no more than two feet above the elevation of the bottom of the receiving watercourse at the outlet, unless adequate slope protection and channel are constructed to safely convey the discharge from the outlet of the pipe to the receiving channel. 
iii.  Energy dissipation. The maximum developed condition flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line with an adjoining tract shall not exceed the maximum predeveloped condition velocity. 
J.  Discharge of Concentrated Flows   
1.  The discharge of concentrated flows of stormwater into public roadways shall be avoided. Applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that all reasonable efforts have been made to control stormwater on the project site. 
2.  In residential subdivisions, the drainage area contributing to the peak flow along any property line between lots within 50 feet of the building setback line for either lot shall not exceed two acres, unless contained within a piped drainage system or maintained in a natural watercourse. The stormwater conveyance shall be in a drainage easement. 
3.  Storm drain stenciling. When required by the city, all residential subdivision and commercial entity storm drainage structures or facilities (catch basins, storm sewer inlets, manholes and other structures that capture and convey stormwater runoff) shall be properly identified as draining to a stream. 
K.  Stormwater Management   
1.  Design criteria—General. 
a.  All design related to the stormwater facilities shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, latest edition, as adopted or amended. 
b.  Installation of properly functioning stormwater facilities, including outflow control devices shall be the responsibility of the owner. If any facilities are damaged or destroyed during grading or construction activities, all processes shall cease until such devices are restored to their functional capacity. The owner, through application for a land disturbance permit, agrees to accept this responsibility. 
2.  Stormwater management report required. A stormwater management report shall be provided for every project as required by the city's stormwater management ordinance. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. The design professional shall be responsible for obtaining all information necessary for the report. Hydrologic analysis and detention pond hydraulics, pipe and open channel hydraulics, culvert hydraulics and water quality best management practices shall be certified by a design professional registered in the State of Georgia. 
L.  Stormwater Detention   
1.  Whenever a stormwater management report indicates that an adverse impact from stormwater runoff is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be provided with stormwater detention facilities. The meaning of adverse impact shall apply to situations where the post-developed discharge velocities and/or flows, up to and including the 100-year storm event, exceed those determined for the predeveloped conditions or where the downstream conditions indicated that the design flow exceeds the conveyance capacity of the receiving facility or potentially creates flooding conditions in downstream structures. 
2.  Stormwater detention facilities shall be designed so that their peak release rates, when combined with those of all detention bypass areas in the same basin, produce peak flow rates and flow velocities at the site's boundary line no greater than those which occurred at the same location under predeveloped conditions. 
3.  Peak flow rate and velocity control shall normally be provided only for the two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year frequency storm events. However, under certain conditions, the 100-year event must also be detained to the predeveloped rate. Such control of the 100-year event shall be provided when failure to do so would result in flooding of other habitable dwellings, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
4.  Stormwater detention facilities shall be provided, unless the registered design professional provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the director that at least one of the following is true and correct as applicable: 
a.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility which has been designed to manage the upstream property's runoff or to the point in the downstream analysis which shows that detention is not required; or, 
b.  Where the site runoff will flow directly into a stream or lake without crossing off-site properties and the following conditions are met: 
c.  Conveyance systems on the project site are adequately designed or sufficient in their existing conditions to transport the undetained flows without further degredation; and, 
d.  The downstream analysis, using timing of the hydrographs, shows no adverse impacts from the exit of the site to the point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total drainage basin area. 
e.  Should the authorized registered professional conclude that stormwater detention may not be necessary, rigid compliance with all of the following criteria is mandatory: 
f.  A stormwater management report shall always be required whether or not stormwater detention is required. 
g.  If the applicant proposes to show that the detention requirement may be eliminated for all or a portion of a project, then a pre-submittal conference with the department staff is required prior to preparation and submittal of construction plans for the project. 
h.  At the pre-submittal conference with the staff, the design professional shall be prepared to discuss the downstream analysis findings as follows: 
i.  The affected stream must be analyzed downstream from the project to a point where the project area is ten percent of the total drainage basin. The analysis must include all culverts, obstructions, existing and potential erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, and any other existing modifications to natural conditions; and, 
j.  If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the predeveloped flows in the stream, then detention shall be required unless the developer elects to eliminate the downstream overburdened conditions at his or her expense when the development occurs; and, 
k.  If there are any existing drainage complaints downstream, then detention shall be required unless the developer elects to minimize the conditions causing the complaint at his or her expense when the development occurs. 
l.  Where it is determined by the analysis required by this section that stormwater detention is not required it should not be interpreted as a waiver of channel protection and water quality requirements. 
m.  All stormwater detention/retention structures (both above and below ground) shall be located outside of building setbacks and zoning buffers. 
5.  Extended detention. Extended detention shall normally be provided in accordance with the requirements of the city stormwater ordinance. 
6.  Water quality. Water quality measures shall be installed in accordance with the city stormwater ordinance. 
7.  Upstream conditions. 
a.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized based on all on-site upstream areas being developed in accordance with the development plans and the off-site upstream areas being fully developed in accordance with the land use plan with no detention. Upstream detention may be included when determining flows, provided the engineer calculates the reduced flow by routing the developed flows through any stormwater facility included in the analysis rather than assuming that a reduction will occur. The design professional shall show that detention facilities used in the analysis will remain, be properly maintained and the storage volume and outlet structure configuration is based on current conditions. 
b.  Detention facilities shall be designed using predeveloped flows based on existing conditions for all upstream areas including existing on-site lakes, ponds and detention facilities. Post-developed flows shall be based on the upstream basin areas being developed as shown on the approved development plans and existing conditions for off-site upstream areas. Upstream detention may be included if it meets the conditions as described for culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems. 
c.  Existing conditions (predevelopment). Existing or predevelopment conditions shall be defined as the conditions of the site at the time the development permit is applied for. The existing condition shall include all on-site lakes, ponds, or detention facilities. Predeveloped flows shall be determined by routing the flows through these stormwater facilities. 
If it is determined by the director that the existing conditions downstream of the project site warrant further protection the director may require the existing conditions analysis to assume that the site is in its natural, undisturbed state. 
8.  Hydrology report requirements. The stormwater management report shall comply with the city's stormwater management ordinance, latest edition, and shall include the following information when applicable: 
a.  Cover sheet signed and sealed in accordance with the stormwater management ordinance; 
b.  Table of contents; 
c.  Narrative summary; 
d.  Numerical summary; 
e.  Basin delineation maps (pre and post, tc flow paths, sub-basin CN); 
f.  Hydrograph input and output; 
g.  Routing input and output; 
h.  Stage-storage/outflow relationships; 
i.  Outlet control details; 
j.  Ten percent downstream analysis; 
k.  Channel/ditch calculations; 
l.  Pipe chart (shown on plans also); 
m.  Gutter spread calculations; 
n.  Downstream sediment analysis. 
i.  Side slope and fencing requirements. All stormwater facilities shall be constructed with maximum 2:1 side slopes or fenced when the facility contains a permanent pool deeper than 18 inches or the 25-year maximum flood depth exceeds 18 inches (use a 24-hour duration for facilities designed using SCS methodology). The fence shall be a minimum of six feet high and made of a durable material with a ten-foot wide access gate. The fence shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements. 
ii.  Temporary facilities. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and shall be in place and inspected prior to the initiation of other improvements. If the detention facility is planned to be a lake, micro pool or constructed wetland, temporary detention facilities shall be provided and shall remain in place until the feature has become a functional stormwater management facility. 
9.  Redevelopment and the use of existing stormwater facilities. 
a.  When a development uses an existing facility where the last approved certification and record drawing of the facility was over 18 months prior to the new development's submittal, the design professional shall provide one of the following: 
b.  A new survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure is constructed as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved; or, 
i.  Construction plans and calculations showing that the outlet structure will function as designed and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility will be equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved once the proposed maintenance has been performed; or, 
ii.  A new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development requirements when the facility was approved. 
c.  When the development is part of a redevelopment strategy or the proposed development intends to use a master facility that does not meet current stormwater standards as established in the stormwater management ordinance, the following shall apply: 
i.  When 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface is created, added, or replaced, or one acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, and the disturbed area is more than 50 percent of the property, the water quality requirements of this section must be met for the entire site. 
ii.  When less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface area is created, added, or replaced, or less than 5,000 square feet of land of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, the project is exempt from having to provide the water quality requirements of this section for the project or for the rest of the site. 
d.  When 1,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area is created, added, or replaced, or 5,000 square feet or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, and the disturbed area is less than 50 percent of the property, the project shall provide water quality treatment for just the improvements on the site. 
e.  Where water quality treatment for a proposed development is to be provided in an existing detention basin then treatment must be provided for the entire original project basin. A modification to the 25-year detention requirement may be granted for the purpose of retrofitting the detention pond to meet current water quality regulations. Granting of a modification will meet the intent and purpose of this chapter when: 
i.  The detention requirements of the current regulations are provided in the facility for the one-year, two-year, five-year and ten-year and 25-year storm. For a retrofitted basin, the volume of the one-year storm shall be based on the original project area being detained instead of the total area draining to the basin; and, 
ii.  The water quality requirements of the current ordinance are provided for the original project area in the facility; and, 
iii.  The ponding limits create a hardship if no modification is granted; and, the outlet structure meets the requirements of the current chapter. 
10.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable nonlocal permits. The applicant may be required to provide documentation that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management report. 
11.  Stormwater facility location criteria. 
a.  For purposes of this chapter, a stormwater facility shall be deemed to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits, the dam (if one) including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements, and any forebay or energy dissipation devices. 
The intent of this chapter is to ensure that the extent of the facility is defined to allow flooding, access and maintenance. Granting of a modification will not nullify this chapter when the facility is a wet pond or lake, the area within the maximum design ponding limits is reduced to a few feet inside the normal pool elevation, and easements are provided on the perimeter properties to allow for flooding, access and maintenance around the lake. In addition, granting of the modification shall only be considered when the wet pond is an amenity and under no circumstances shall the dam and outlet structure lie on private property that is not in some form of common ownership. 
b.  Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on the project site that by-passes the facility. 
c.  No portion of any stormwater facility shall disturb any required buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area. 
d.  The 100-year ponding limits of a stormwater facility shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way. 
e.  Stormwater facilities may be located within or encroach upon utility easements or utility rights-of-way upon receipt by the department of written permission from both the property and utility owners. 
f.  Stormwater facilities may be constructed within recreation areas if the following criteria are met: 
i.  Ownership of the area will be held by a qualified property owner's association, homeowner's association, or other private parties. 
ii.  Permanent structures, such as buildings and swimming pools, will not be constructed within the boundaries of the stormwater facility. 
iii.  Stormwater facilities within active recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the area includes recreation amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open areas or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with detention as a secondary feature. 
iv.  Permanent stormwater features shall not interfere with the intended used of the recreation amenity, (i.e., a ditch or large swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.). 
g.  A residential subdivision of more than three lots that is required by this chapter or the stormwater management ordinance to provide stormwater management facilities shall locate those facilities on an individual lot of record within the development. Lots created within a development project to accommodate detention and retention facilities which are incidental, related, appropriate, and clearly subordinate to the main use in the project are exempt from the minimum lot size requirements in all zoning districts. No other construction/building is permitted on this lot and the lot shall be owned by the homeowners association or the owners of the lots of record being served by this facility. The lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of public road frontage. Access to the facility shall be located on this lot and shall be provided in a manner which allows for access and maintenance of the facility. If the project is provided with an off-site detention facility, a mandatory property owners' association shall be established for its maintenance. The association bylaws shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of a final subdivision plat. 
h.  A nonresidential subdivision is not required to locate an on-site stormwater facility on a separate lot. The property owners served by a stormwater facility that provides detention and/or water quality for more than one property owner or is located off-site shall enter into a maintenance agreement acceptable to the city for the facility's maintenance. However, if desired by the developer, the facility may be located on a separate lot if it is owned and maintained by a mandatory property owners' association. 
12.  Stormwater facility access requirements. 
a.  In both residential and nonresidential projects, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. The easement shall conform to the following requirements: 
i.  The access easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. 
ii.  The minimum drive surface width shall be 15 feet. 
iii.  The drive shall be grassed or paved. 
iv.  The maximum slope shall be 30 percent. 
v.  Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open channel; however, the combined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive. 
vi.  A drive to the bottom of the pond shall be provided when the facility is over ten feet deep from the bench elevation or the facility is wider than 50 feet as measured from bench to bench. 
vii.  Where the facility is completely enclosed by walls, stairs shall be provided into the facility to allow for inspection and maintenance activities. 
b.  When not located on an individual lot of record, every normally-dry stormwater basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the 100-year flooding limits of the stormwater facility and shall encompass any dam, outlet structure and energy dissipation devices. 
13.  Stormwater facility maintenance. 
a.  The storage capacity or function of any stormwater basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural or manmade, shall not be removed or diminished without the express approval of the department. 
b.  In a residential subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the mandatory property owner's association to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater management pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
c.  In a nonresidential project with an on-site stormwater facility which serves only that project, the property owner shall be responsible to maintain the operational characteristics of the facility pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
d.  Where no maintenance covenant has been recorded, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater management pursuant to county requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
e.  Prior to the issuance of a development permit, the owner shall submit a detailed schedule of long-term maintenance and inspection activities. This schedule of activities shall be incorporated into a maintenance covenant signed by the property owner. The schedule shall describe all maintenance and inspection activities and the parties responsible. The maintenance covenant shall be in a form acceptable to the city and shall be recorded in the deed records of the clerk of superior court. 
14.  Stormwater facility certification and as-built drawings. 
a.  When a new facility is constructed in a development, a certified as-built drawing of each stormwater facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. 
b.  Based on the actual parameters established on the as-built drawing, an addendum to the stormwater management report shall be prepared which demonstrates that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of this chapter. The amended or as-built stormwater management report shall be certified by the authorized registered professional. Any deviations from the original design shall be clearly noted as well as any impact, if any, these deficiencies may have on the operational characteristics of the facility. 
c.  The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The as-built drawing and addendum to the stormwater management report shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). 
d.  The as-built drawing shall show the following information. Where elevations or dimensions are shown on the as-built, the original design data should be shown and struck through with the actual as-built data indicated next to that: 
i.  Horizontal and vertical alignment; 
ii.  Locations of all manholes, catch basins and junction boxes; 
iii.  Detention, retention, water quality facilities; 
iv.  Storm system outfalls; 
v.  Creeks and drainage swales or ditches; 
vi.  Piping materials; 
vii.  Location and extent of easements; 
viii.  Property lines. 
This information shall be provided in the form of plans, profiles, details, sections and plats and when possible provided to the city in an electronic format compatible with the city database. 
15.  Parking lot detention facilities. 
a.  Parking lot detention facilities shall generally be of one of the two following types: 
i.  Depressed areas of pavement at drop inlet locations; and 
ii.  Ponding areas along sections of raised curbing. The curbing in these areas is usually higher than a standard curbed section. 
b.  Parking lot detention areas shall be located so as to restrict ponding to areas other than parking spaces near buildings, and to not encroach upon entrance drives. 
c.  The maximum depth of detention ponding in a parking lot, except at a flow control structure, shall be six inches for a ten-year storm, and nine inches for a 100-year storm. The maximum depth of ponding at a flow control structure shall be 12 inches for a 100-year storm. 
d.  In truck parking areas, the maximum depth of ponding shall be 12 inches for the ten-year storm. 
e.  Detention ponding areas are to be drained within 30 minutes after the peak inflow occurs. 
f.  Parking lot detention areas shall have a minimum surface slope of one percent, and a maximum slope of five percent. 
16.  Underground and rooftop detention facilities. The design of underground or rooftop detention facilities shall be in accordance with current engineering standard practice, and shall conform to the requirements of this article. In the case of rooftop detention, permissible structural loads and weatherproofing shall be governed by the Georgia State Building Code as may be amended by the city. 
17.  Sediment basins. 
a.  Stormwater management and sediment trapping functions should be separated whenever possible. Every erosion control design should seek to: First, prevent erosion from occurring; second, trap sediments as close to their sources as possible, and third, provide a second-tier or backup line of defense against sediments leaving the project site. This backup defense will usually consist of check dams and/or sediment basins. 
b.  Whenever a sediment basin and a detention facility are both required on the same watercourse, the sediment basin should be located immediately upstream of the detention facility. 
c.  In cases where a normally-dry detention basin is planned to be used to trap sediment as well as provide stormwater control, under cutting of the basin will not be permitted. 
d.  The design of sediment basins shall be in accordance with of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", latest edition. 
e.  Trapping of sediment in state waters shall not be allowed. 
18.  Ponds and lakes not used for detention. In such cases where a pond or lake is provided as part of a development, but is not planned to function as a stormwater detention facility, the same general and specific criteria contained in this chapter shall apply, but may be modified in instances where a specific requirement is clearly detention oriented rather than safety-based. 
a.  Application and exemptions. This dam section shall apply to all new, rebuilt, or modified stormwater impoundment's including appurtenant works whose height exceeds ten feet as measured from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse at the downstream toe of the barrier, or the lowest elevation of the outside limit of the barrier, if the barrier is not across a stream channel or watercourse, to the maximum water storage elevation, with the exception of: 
i.  Any Category I dam requiring permitting under the control of the Georgia Safe Dams Program. 
ii.  Any dam owned and operated by any department or agency of the United States Government. 
iii.  Any newly constructed dam financially assisted by the United States Soil Conservation Service or any other department or agency of the United States government when such department or agency designed or approved plans and supervised construction and maintains a regular program of inspection of the dam. 
iv.  Any dam licensed by the federal energy regulatory commission, or for which a license application is pending with the federal energy regulatory commission. 
b.  Existing dams. Any dam currently constructed and operating and not subject to regulation under the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 or located on a site for which a development permit is requested is hereby grandfathered in its present state with the owner thereof assuming all rights, responsibilities, and liabilities thereof, subject to the provisions of section 103-111(c). Upon any modification to the dam it shall become subject to this chapter. 
Dams that are located on a project site for which a development permit is being requested shall be brought up to the minimum design standards contained in this chapter regardless of whether any modifications are proposed to the dam or appurtenant structures. If the dam and structures are not wholly contained within the project boundaries the director may waive any or all of these requirements when satisfied that all reasonable efforts have been unsuccessful to obtain the approval from adjacent land owners for any work necessary to comply with this chapter. 
c.  Emergency draining of a lake. Upon obtaining, evidence which indicates that a potentially hazardous condition may exist, such as: 
i.  Excessive leakage transporting soil from the dam interior (i.e. piping); 
ii.  Slope failure, excessive scouring or other apparent soil instability; 
iii.  Longitudinal cracks, bulging, or shifts in alignment; 
iv.  Excessive sloughing or seepage; 
v.  Failure of the spillways and/or outlet devices to function properly (due to clog age, damage or other deficiency). 
The director has the authority to order the immediate and complete draining of the lake in whatever manner deemed necessary at the time and to require the owner to keep the pool down until remedial work, as is deemed most appropriate to create a safe dam condition, is completed and approved by the director. 
d.  New Category I and Category II dams. Any new or modified dams classified as Category I or Category II as defined by the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-375 shall be subject to the following: 
These dams are generally defined as any artificial barrier which impounds or diverts water and either of the following is true: 
The barrier is more than 25 feet in height as measured from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse at the downstream toe of the barrier, or from the lowest elevation of the outside limit of the barrier, if the barrier is not across a stream channel or watercourse to the maximum water storage elevation; or 
It has an impounding capacity of 100 acre-feet or more. 
e.  The developer of any new dam classified as a Category I dam under the rules of the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 and Rules for Dam Safety adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The developer shall obtain necessary approvals and permits from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the project and the dam prior to securing a land disturbance permit from the department. 
f.  The developer of any new dam classified as Category II under the rules of the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 shall submit construction plans to the city for review of the project and the dam prior to securing a land disturbance permit from the department subject to the following: 
i.  If the developer elects to construct the new Category II dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, i.e. Category I standards, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. 
ii.  If the developer elects not to construct the new Category II dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, then the following information shall be submitted along with the construction plans for review prior to securing a development permit from the department: 
(a)  A dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis. The breech analysis shall be based on a full pool, sunny day breach; and, 
(b)  The dam shall be required to meet the minimum city standards contained in this development ordinance for dam construction; and, 
(c)  For any new dam that is proposed not to meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the clerk of superior court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. Only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach easement: 
(i)  Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising and agricultural and forestry access roads. 
(ii)  Fences. 
(iii)  Outdoor advertising signs provided they are located no closer than 100 feet from any residence or place of business. 
(iv)  Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
(v)  Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar facilities and structures. 
g.  Prior to recording of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the city, such as a mandatory property owners association, prior to approval of the final plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its impoundment. 
h.  New dams between ten feet and 25 feet in height. Any newly constructed or modified dams that is ten feet or more in height but less than 25 feet in height or having a storage capacity in between 50 acre-feet and 100 acre-feet at the maximum water storage elevation shall be subject to regulation under these development standards. Any dam that meets the height thresholds of this section and which does not meet the design standards contained in the rules for dam safety shall meet the following minimum standards: 
i.  General requirements. 
(a)  Design shall be by a professional engineer registered and licensed to practice engineering in the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Plans shall be submitted to the city for review and comment. 
(c)  Prior to construction of any dam over ten vertical feet or any dam impounding more than 50 acre-feet, the contractor shall provide the city with sufficient documentation of his qualifications to construct dams. 
(d)  A pre-design meeting shall be held with representatives of the engineering division to review any proposed dam or proposed dam changes for any dam over ten vertical feet or impounding more than 50 acre feet. Depending on the level of downstream risk, and size of impoundment, the city may require a dam breach analysis to be submitted for any proposed or existing dam contained within a proposed development, utilizing the National Weather Service's DAMBREAK program or other methodology approved by the Georgia Safe Dams Program. 
(e)  When a dam breach analysis is required by the city, a sunny day dam breach analysis shall be performed under full pool conditions as a minimum. 
(f)  All impoundments shall have a permanent drain capable of draining the pool to a depth of no more than two feet within 24 hours. 
(g)  No roadways shall be constructed over any permanent water impoundment structure if that roadway provides the only means of egress for any lot of record, without prior approval of the city. 
(h)  No utilities are permitted to pass through any dam, either longitudinally or transversely, without prior approval of the city. 
(i)  In addition to the storm events that are required in this chapter, any dam that impounds stormwater to meet the requirements of the city's post-development stormwater management chapter shall also be evaluated based on the storm required in that ordinance. 
ii.  Report requirements. Guidelines are available from the State of Georgia Safe Dams program (EPD) to assist the design/construction professional. Dam design documents shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Hydrology/hydraulic report; 
(b)  Geotechnical report (with borrow study, applicable); 
(c)  Drainage basin map with land use and land improvement parameters; 
(d)  Existing topography of site; 
(e)  Plan view of dam; 
(f)  Cross sections at all critical points; 
(g)  Delineated dam breach zone; 
(h)  Complete details; 
(i)  Technical specifications; 
(j)  Names and professional seals of design civil engineer and geotechnical engineer with 24-hour contact; 
(k)  Designated contractor (if available). 
iii.  Outlet/spillway requirements. Because of the variables associated with selecting spillway(s), outlet device(s) or appurtenant structure(s) to suit a given site condition, the design consultant is responsible for the selection, subject to the review and approval of the stormwater division. The division will include in its consideration the case of maintenance, longevity of the system, blockage potential, and practicality of operations. 
(a)  No orifice shall be less than 3 inches in diameter unless it is installed to meet a state or local requirement. 
(b)  All risers (standpipes) shall be equipped with a debris deflector (trash rack) and an anti-vortex device. To facilitate outlet operation, curved or inclined a-ash racks designed to allow debris to rise with the water level are preferred. In all cases, trash racks shall be either hinged or removable to facilitate maintenance operations. Corrugated metal pipe is not permitted for standpipes. 
(c)  Spillways: Every dam shall be provided with a principal spillway, fully capable of passing at least the 50-year flood, with excess spillway capacity provided by the emergency spillway(s) capable of handling excess flows up to the design storm. The principal spillway can be sized for floods of less magnitude than the 50-year flood only if the emergency spillway is appropriately armored against scour with concrete or other suitable lining as protection against more frequent usage. 
(d)  Principal Spillway: All spillways shall be analyzed (hydraulically rated) for both inlet and outlet control conditions using appropriate tail-water ratings. If a control-box or weir-box is affixed, then the coral system (inlet control box and outlet conduit) shall be hydraulically rated to determine the stage-discharge relationship. 
(e)  Emergency Spillway(s): For every type of water impounding facility a planned safe flow path must be provided for conveyance of flows of water in an emergency. In many instances, this function can be provided through installation of an emergency spillway. Emergency spillways may be excavated open channels, either vegetated or paved with reinforced concrete or weir sections of concrete walls, or, appropriately designed conduit. Any portion of an open channel spillway excavated into a dam embankment or other fill section must be paved with reinforced concrete equipped with appropriate seepage controls, under-drainage and cut-off walls. 
(f)  Any portion of any spillway excavated into undisturbed residual soil shall be vegetated in accordance with the practices described in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" or protected against scour and erosion by other suitable measures if vegetation does not provide adequate stabilization. The spillway is activated by storms smaller than the 50-year frequency, and then vegetation alone will not be considered sufficient protection against scour according to these standards. 
iv.  Permanent impoundments. The following requirements shall apply to lakes and ponds that maintain a permanent pool of water: 
(a)  Earthen dam. 
1.  Design storm shall be at least 25 percent of the probable maximum precipitation storm event (¼ PMP). 
2.  Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 50-year flood. 
3.  Emergency spillway(s) as a minimum shall be adequate to handle flows in excess of the 50-year flood, up to the ¼ PMP. Front and back slopes, each, shall not be steeper than 3:1 unless design includes a slope stability analysis that confirms and documents a steeper slope will be stable. In no condition, however, will a slope steeper than 2:1 be permitted. 
4.  All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation certified by a geotechnical engineer (PE). 
5.  Earthen fill shall be CL or ML material approved for use by geotechnical engineer (PE) and placed and compacted to not less than 95 percent standard proctor under said engineer's direction. 
6.  Compaction records accompanied by a geotechnical engineer's certification that soil compaction meets this specification shall be forwarded to the city. 
7.  The low level outlet (lake drain) shall be concrete pressure pipe or ductile iron pressure pipe, cradled in concrete. Bedding shall be in concrete poured the full width of the exposed trench and as a minimum, up to the spring line of the pipe. Pipe and joints shall be rated for internal pressures exceeding that of the design storm and shall meet or exceed ASTM 361 or AWWA C-301. Corrugated metal pipe is not allowed. 
8.  A lake drain may also be comprised of a valve-operated siphon system designed by a registered civil engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. Piping for a siphon system shall be ductile iron with mechanical joints or PV joints with adequate strength and anchoring to sustain the water forces incumbent with operation. 
9.  Freeboard of dam above the design storm maximum pool shall be three feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. The city reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal three-feet requirement if supported by fetch calculations. 
10.  Crest width shall be not less than eight feet. 
11.  Embankments shall be protected from erosion by appropriate vegetation, rip rap, paving or some other type of protective surface and maintained in a safe condition. In appropriate vegetation such as trees or shrubs and hedges that may obscure inspection of the dam shall not be allowed or shall be removed. A qualified professional shall be consulted prior to the removal of trees over four inches dbh or where the removal of any trees may endanger the function or stability of the dam. 
(b)  Gravity dam (reinforced concrete or masonry). 
1.  Design, construction supervision, and certification of completion according to plans and specifications to be by design civil engineer and a geotechnical engineer both licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
2.  Design shall address and account for overturning, uplift, and seepage with adequate safety factory and adequate freeboard. 
3.  All slab on grade concrete, including concrete footings, shall be designed and constructed to control seepage and piping of foundation soil along the underside of the slab in incorporating cutoff walls, or other appropriate measures. 
4.  Design storm shall be at least 25 percent of the probable maximum precipitation (¼ PMP). 
5.  Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 50-year flood unless the emergency spillway is appropriately armored against scouring. 
6.  Emergency spillway shall be adequate to handle flows in excess of the 50-year flood, up to the ¼ PMP. 
7.  Freeboard of dam above the design storm maximum pool shall be three feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. Additional freeboard above the nominal three feet required if supported by fetch calculations. 
8.  All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation certified by a geotechnical engineer (PE). 
9.  Earthen fill (if any) shall be subject to the criteria specified above for earthen embankments. 
v.  Temporary/dry impoundments. The following requirements shall apply to those stormwater facilities that are normally dry, i.e. dry detention ponds: 
(a)  Design criteria: 
1.  Design storm shall be at least the 100-year, 24-hour storm. 
2.  Multi-frequency outflow control shall be provided in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Manual. Storm frequencies may include: 24-hour extended detention for the one-year event and peak flow attenuation for the 25-year and 100-year events. 
3.  Principal spillway shall be adequate to handle at least the 25-year flood. 
4.  Emergency spillway(s) shall be provided to handle flows in excess of the 25-year flood, up to the 100-year flood. 
5.  Where fencing is required by section 103-110(i) the fence shall not extend across the emergency spillway in such a manner as to create a possible clogging hazard. 
(b)  Earthen dam: 
1.  Front slope shall not be steeper than 2.5:1 unless design includes a slope stability analysis that confirms and documents a steeper slope will be stable. In no condition, however, can any slope be steeper than 2:1. 
2.  All organics and topsoil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation inspected and approved by the city prior to fill placement. 
3.  Earthen fill shall be CL or ML material approved for use by geotechnical engineer (PE) and placed and compacted to not less than 95 percent standard proctor under said engineer's direction. 
4.  Freeboard of dam above the 100-year design storm maximum pool shall be 2.0 feet in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. The city reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal two-foot requirement if supported by fetch calculations. 
5.  Crest width shall be not less than eight feet, unless approved by the department. 
6.  Embankments shall be protected from erosion by appropriate vegetation, riprap, paving or some other type of protective surface and maintained in a safe condition. In appropriate vegetation such as trees or shrubs and hedges that may obscure inspection of the dam shall not be allowed or shall be removed. A qualified professional shall be consulted prior to the removal of trees over four inches dbh or where the removal of any trees may endanger the function or stability of the dam. 
(c)  Gravity dam (reinforced concrete or masonry). 
1.  Design shall address and account for overturning uplift, and seepage with adequate safety factor, and adequate freeboard. 
2.  All slab on grade concrete, including concrete footings, shall be designed and constructed to incorporate appropriate cutoff walls. 
3.  Under no condition, can any fill slope (if any) be steeper than 3:1. 
4.  All organics and top soil shall be removed from the entire footprint of the dam and the foundation inspected and approved by the city prior to gravity dam concrete or masonry placement. 
5.  Earthen fill (if required) shall be approved for use by geotechnical engineer (PE) and placed and compacted to not less than 95 percent standard proctor under said engineer's direction. 
6.  Freeboard of dam above the 100-year design storm maximum pool shall be two feet along any earth fill sections of the dam, in lieu of fetch calculations of wave height justifying a lesser freeboard. The city reserves the right to require additional freeboard above the nominal two-feet requirement if supported by fetch calculations. 
(d)  Existing Category II dams. When an existing Category II dam may be reclassified to a Category I dam because of a proposed development downstream of the dam, the following shall be provided by the developer for review by the Georgia safe dams program. 
1.  Location of the Category II dam and the proposed development; and, 
2.  A surveyed cross-section of the stream valley at the location of the proposed development including finished floor elevations; and, 
3.  A dam breach analysis using the dam break computer model to establish the height of the flood wave in the downstream floodplain. The dam break modeling shall be completed in accordance with the safe dams' program quality assurance program by a qualified registered engineer. 
SECTION 11 - WATER CONSERVATION 
A.  In General This chapter shall be cited as the Water Conservation Ordinance of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
1.  Purpose.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote water conservation by establishing water use rules for year round water conservation, to promote the efficient use of water, to reduce or eliminate the waste of water in the city, and to enable implementation of the city's water shortage contingency measures. 
2.  Adoption of water use rules.  The city hereby adopts by reference the outdoor water use rules mandated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division ("EPD"), from time to time, as the same may be modified by the City of Atlanta Department of Watershed Management (the "EPD/Watershed Management Rules"). A copy of the current EPD/Watershed Management Rules is incorporated herein by reference, and a current copy of the same shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
3.  Water conservation incentives.  The city has developed and implemented economic incentives for conservative water use, identified as the "City of Sandy Springs Water Conservation Permit Incentive Program," a copy of which will be maintained on file with the city's department of community development. 
4.  Additional water conservation measures.  In addition to the water conservation requirements established by this chapter, the city manager or his or her designee is authorized to develop and promulgate additional water conservation plans and measures which shall be directed to achieve target goals for water conservation as determined by the city council by resolution from time to time. 
B.  Specific Water Conservation Requirements   
1.  Rain sensor shut-off switch required. 
(a)  As used in this Code section, the term "rain sensor shut-off switch" means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of an irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen or whether the temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) or below. 
(b)  (1)  No person shall install any landscape irrigation system equipped with an electronic controller that does not have a rain sensor shut-off switch. 
(2)  Section 11 B-1(b)(1) shall not apply to either landscape irrigation systems installed on golf courses or any system dependent upon a nonpublic water source. 
2.  Water stewardship restrictions. 
(a)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) of this section shall not create any limitations upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city regulations and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable Fulton County Board of Health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydro-seeding. 
C.  Enforcement   
1.  Compatibility with other regulations.  This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other chapter, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other chapter, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
2.  Violations.  Any violation of this chapter in effect from time to time shall constitute a violation of this chapter as set forth in this chapter. 
SECTION 12 - PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 
A.  Conceptual Plan/Preliminary Plat Specifications The following subsections outline the required elements of both the required and optional plans and plats mentioned throughout this section, and especially in the Sandy Springs Development Ordinance. 
1.  Application. The conceptual plan/preliminary plat for a subdivision or site development shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, provided, however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of 24 inches by 36 inches. The director may approve other scales and sheet sizes as deemed appropriate. 
2.  Conceptual plan/preliminary plat checklist. Refer to checklist. 
B.  Subdivision Development Plans   
1.  Application. An application for a land disturbance permit for a subdivision shall consist of the conceptual plan or preliminary plat, a certified boundary survey, associated slope or construction easements (if any), and such other development plans as may be required by this section. 
2.  Conformance to conceptual plan/preliminary plat. The development plans shall generally conform to the conceptual plan/preliminary plat, and may constitute only that portion of the approved conceptual plan/preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposes to construct at one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Scale. The development plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Plan and profile sheets shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than ten feet to one inch. 
4.  Certified boundary survey. The development plans shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the conceptual plan/preliminary plat, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
a.  Each development plan shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary survey which shall at least meet the requirements of above. 
5.  Development plan checklist. The development plans shall contain the following: Refer to checklist. 
6.  Certificate of development plan approval. Each site plan shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon: 
7.  All requirements of the City of Sandy Springs Development Ordinance relative to the preparation and submission of a Land Disturbance Permit application having been fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed and approved by all affected city departments as required under their respective and applicable ordinances, approval is hereby granted of this Site Plan and all other development plans associated with this project subject to all further provisions of said development and other city ordinances. 
8.  ____________   ____________  Director;      Date  Community Development Department 
9.  Encroachments. Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the department prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
10.  Public notice—Drainage. Every site plan shall contain the following statement: 
a.  Note: The City of Sandy Springs assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded plan. The city does not assume the responsibility for the maintenance of pipes in drainage easements beyond the city right-of-way. 
b.  Note: Stream buffers are to remain in a natural and undisturbed condition. 
c.  Note: Structures are not allowed in drainage easements. 
C.  Final Plat Specifications   
1.  Sheet size. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on tracing cloth or other permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be 100 feet to one inch (1" equals 100') or larger. Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. 
2.  Certified boundary survey. The final plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the final plat, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
3.  Conformance with conceptual plan/preliminary plat. The final plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the sub-divider proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and said portion is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the preliminary plat shall require revision and re-approval of the preliminary plat. 
4.  Final plat checklist. The final plat shall contain the following information: Refer to checklist. 
5.  Dedication of lands to the city. If any lands are shown as the final plat for dedication to the city other than street rights-of-way or easements, a warranty deed transferring title to said land in fee simple, in a form acceptable to the director, shall be submitted with the final plat application. 
6.  Dedication of lands to property owners' association. If any lands are shown on the final plat for dedication to a property owners' association in order to meet minimum park or open space requirements of this chapter, a copy of the deed of transfer for such dedication and a copy of the instrument of incorporation of the property owners' association shall be submitted with the final plat application. 
D.  Residential Site Plan   
1.  Scale. Residential site plans shall be drawn to scale and may be shown on a certified boundary survey of the lot or any other drawing showing the information required below. The department may accept a residential site plan drawn to the same scale as shown on the final plat where sufficient detail can be shown to support an adequate review and approval. 
2.  Accuracy. It is not the intent of the department that the residential site plan be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer, but may be done by the individual proposing the improvements on the lot. It is the intent, however, to receive a drawing with sufficient readability and accuracy to ensure that the proposed improvements will be constructed on the lot in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the zoning resolution, or other ordinances, as applicable. 
3.  Residential site plan checklist. Residential site plans shall show the following as applicable: Refer to checklist. 
4.  Chattahoochee River Corridor. If a lot is located in the Chattahoochee River Corridor, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for the structure or other improvements until conformance to the provisions or other requirements of the residential site plan have been field verified by a survey prepared by the builder's surveyor and submitted to the department of planning and development. 
E.  Site Development Plans   
1.  Application. An application for a development permit for a multifamily or nonresidential site shall consist of the site plan, a certified boundary survey or final plat reference, erosion, sediment and pollution control plan, grading plan, utility plan, profile sheets, details, associated slope or construction easements (if any), and such other development plans as may be required by this chapter. 
2.  Conformance to conceptual plan/preliminary plat. The development plans shall generally conform to the conceptual plan/preliminary plat, if any, and may constitute only that portion of the approved conceptual plan which the developer proposed to construct at one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all setbacks, maximum density, and other zoning restrictions. If no conceptual plan was approved on the property, the development plans shall include the entire property being developed having the same zoning category. 
3.  Scale. The development plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at an engineering scale convenient to illustrate the details of the project. Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Plan and profile sheets, if any, shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than ten feet to one inch. 
4.  Project boundary data. The site plan shall be based on the boundaries of a lot as recorded on a final subdivision plat or on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the project, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
a.  Each site plan shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary survey which shall at least meet the requirements above. 
5.  Site development plan checklist. The development plans shall contain sufficient data to determine sufficient regulatory compliance with all city codes and ordinances. The submittal shall be in compliance with the minimum information required under "Subdivision Development Plans", of this Section. 
6.  Certificate of development plans approval. Each site plan shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon: 
7.  All requirements of the City of Sandy Springs development regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a Land Disturbance Permit application having been fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed and approved by all affected city departments as required under their respective and applicable ordinances, approval is hereby granted of this Site Plan and all other development plans associated with this project subject to all further provisions of said Development and other City Ordinances. 

 
F.  Street Naming and Addressing   
1.  Address numbers. All residential, commercial, office, industrial and other tracts of land in the city on which a principal building is or will be located are required to be issued an address by the department or its successor department. Each such address shall be posted by the owner on or about the tract in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Except as provided elsewhere in the Technical Manual, all addresses shall contain (in addition to the roadway name) numbers only. Alphanumeric or lettered addresses shall not be permitted. Each address shall conform to the following rules: 
2.  For non-single-family residential properties, all principal buildings shall have affixed to the building the address number(s) directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than twelve inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. Each building letter shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the project or complex in which the building is located. Such building letter shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. 
3.  Non-single-family residential properties shall have only one address assigned for each principal building. Once a systematic pattern of addresses has been established by the department, it shall be maintained for the entire project. Alternatively, such non-single-family residential developments shall seek approval from the department of names of internal streets within the development, in which case the department shall assign addresses on such internal streets. Non-single-family residential developments (including apartments, townhouses and condominiums) shall have building addresses (and letters for multiple buildings) for the principal building(s) and numbers for each individual unit as approved by the department. Condominiums and/or town homes to be occupied by independent owners may be assigned individual addresses. Unit numbers shall be assigned based upon a system whereby the first digit represents the building floor. 
4.  For nonresidential properties, all principal buildings shall have affixed to the building or structure the address number directly over or on the main entrance door(s). Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and no more than twelve inches in height and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. Each building letter shall be prominently displayed on each side of said building that is visible from the main access or parking area serving the development in which the building is located. Such building letter shall be at least 12 inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. 
5.  Nonresidential properties shall have only one address and shall be assigned a building letter for each principal building and individual suite numbers by the department. Letters shall not be used to distinguish between individual suites. Once a systematic pattern of addresses has been established by the department, it shall be maintained for the entire project. Alternatively, such nonresidential developments shall seek approval of names of internal streets within the development, in which case the department shall assign addresses on such internal streets. 
6.  For all commercial, office, industrial or multifamily residential developments that contain multiple addresses and/or building numbers, the range of addresses and/or building numbers shall also be posted on the main sign or identification monument at the main entrance and shall be readily identifiable from the edge of the roadway. Directions to other buildings within such a development shall be clearly posted at each internal roadway intersection. For multifamily residential developments, directional signs indicating the location of individual units shall be placed on each floor at the primary point of ingress and egress (e.g., at the elevator or main stairwell). 
7.  For all commercial, office, industrial or multifamily residential developments any entrance way or principal building that is not readily visible from the roadway, address numbers shall also be posted at the main entrance or driveway to the principal building. Such address numbers shall be at least six inches and not more than twelve inches in height and shall be of a color which contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. (2000 International Fire Code, Section 505). 
8.  For properties whose primary access is different from their lot frontage, address number shall be assigned and posted from the access point. 
9.  Each single-family dwelling shall have its address number posted on a mailbox or addressing post located at or near the main entrance or vehicle access point to the property. Such address numbers shall have a minimum stroke height of three inches and shall be of a color that contrasts with the surrounding surface so as to be readily identifiable without obstruction from the edge of the roadway. 
10.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, all properties shall be identified by a property number of a minimum size as identified in this section. All permanent freestanding signs shall display the street number assigned to the principal parcel. These street numbers shall have a minimum height of six inches. The address shall be visible from both directions of approach and be placed on a contrasting background. 
11.  If access to any principal building is by way of a roadway different from the principal building's address roadway, the address number shall be posted on the address roadway. In such cases, the address roadway and address number shall also be posted on each entrance roadway at the intersection of the access point and the entrance roadway. 
12.  Each roadway, including state and federal highways, shall contain address numbers that are consistently sequenced throughout its length. 
13.  Address numbers shall be assigned such that, traveling from lower address numbers to higher address numbers, odd-numbered addresses are on the right side of the roadway and even-numbered addresses are on the left side of the roadway. 
14.  Each property owner shall keep all address numbers in good repair and shall not allow such numbers to be obscured as viewed from the roadway. 
15.  To the extent not in conflict with the provisions of this article, Sandy Springs shall follow the guidelines set forth in the Proposed Property Numbering System for Metropolitan Atlanta promulgated by the Atlanta Region Metropolitan Planning Commission (1963), except for internal culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac shall be addressed in three digits numbers (100, 110, etc). Internal culs-de-sac shall comply with the remaining provisions of this section and this article. 
16.  The property owner shall have the responsibility of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section, regardless of whether the premises are leased or owner-occupied. 
G.  Subdivisions and Other New Developments.   
1.  All project names for and roadway names and addresses within subdivisions and other new developments shall be reviewed and approved by the department during the minor subdivision plat or land disturbance permit (LDP) approval process. Prior to the release of a LDP, all street names must be approved for use within the subdivision. Once a project name has been approved, it shall not be changed without written permission by the director of the department. For continuity, the LDP number assigned to the project, regardless of the project name used at the time of submittal, must appear on the face of all referenced documents, including, but not limited to, all LDP drawings, studies, plans and plats. 
2.  Each application for a land disturbance permit for a multifamily development shall include a concept plan identifying all proposed roadways with the proposed names for said roadways. Any subsequent request for roadway name or address changes by the subdivider or developer will require submission of a new preliminary plat (or concept plan, as applicable) for review by the department. 
3.  Once an LDP is approved, no lot number, street name or address shall be changed by the re-recording of a plat without the prior expressed written consent of the department. No application for a permit on said lot thus affected will be considered until approved by the department. Each request submitted for the re-recordation of a plat shall be charged a processing fee as established by the mayor and council. 
a.  Exceptions. When the director finds that adherence to the address numbering standards, set forth in this article would pose a threat to public safety, deviations from the standard address numbering policies and procedures may be allowed. 
b.  Project names. No new project name may be recorded, used or posted unless and until approved by the department. Duplication of project names is prohibited. The use of a project name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a project name that is already in use within the city is prohibited. 
c.  Roadway names. No new roadway name may be posted or used in an address unless and until approved by the department. 
1.  Roadway names must be reserved for use prior to the release of the land disturbance permit or minor plat. 
2.  Roadway names, once approved, shall be held in reservation for use by the owner/developer for a period not to exceed 36 months. 
a.[d.]  Standards for roadway names. 
1.  Duplication of roadway names is prohibited. No roadway name shall contain a number (e.g., 5th Street), and, except for suffixes, there shall be no punctuation or abbreviation allowed in any roadway name. 
2.  The use of the same roadway name that is already in use within the city is prohibited. 
3.  The use of a roadway name that is a homonym, sounds like or may otherwise be confused with a roadway name that is already in use within the city is prohibited. Duplicate names with different suffixes should be limited within the same project whenever possible, subject to the review and approval of the department. 
4.  Each roadway, regardless of length, shall have only one name designation throughout its length. Each new roadway that is in alignment with an existing roadway shall bear the same name as said existing roadway. 
5.  No roadway name, including spaces between words and suffix, may be more than 12 characters in length. 
6.  To the greatest extent feasible, roadways that cross into other jurisdictions shall be named and addressed consistently with the names and addresses assigned by such other jurisdictions. 
7.  Street signs, including street name signs, must be installed before any building permits are issued within a development, except that a bond may be offered per the department's policies to cover the costs of the signage and temporary signs erected to release building permits. Permanent signs must be installed prior to the release of any certificate of occupancy within the development. 
a.[e.]  Private roadway naming. The following procedures are established for the mandatory and voluntary naming of private roadways, easements and drives: 
1.  A private roadway, easement or drive serving residential properties shall be required to be named and addressed if there are more than two principal buildings that are not part of a single tract of land which derive access from such private roadway, easement or drive. 
2.  If a private roadway, easement or drive requires naming pursuant to subsection (a), above, a petition, containing the signatures of at least 90 percent of the owners of all real property along such private roadway, easement or drive, must be submitted to the department. In addition to a request for approval, the petition shall include the proposed name for the private roadway, easement or drive that is acceptable to the petitioners. The proposed name shall conform to the other requirements of this article. The petition shall be accompanied by a general location map and the land lot(s), district, and section within which such private roadway, easement or drive is located. 
3.  Upon approval of a name for the private roadway, easement or drive, and prior to the issuance of any building permits or additional permits the petitioners, shall cause a roadway sign conforming to the city's standards to be erected and maintained at each intersection of such private roadway, easement or drive and any adjacent a public right-of-way. Maintenance of such roadway signs and private roadways, easements or drives shall be the responsibility of the owners of the real property situated along such private roadways, easements or drives; the city shall have no responsibility for the erection and/or maintenance of these items. 
4.  In the event that the owners of the real property situated along a private roadway, easement or drive that requires a name, as set forth above, fail to initiate, respond to or participate in the naming procedure set forth above, the department, after due notice and a minimum 30-day grace period, shall recommend to the mayor and council a name and address numbers for the private roadway, easement or drive and all real property located thereon. The property owners along such private roadway, easement or drive shall be responsible for the erection and maintenance of roadway signs, as set forth in subsection (3), above. 
a.[f.]  Changing of existing roadway names and addresses. 
1.  In any instance where the mayor and council, upon recommendation of the director of the department, determines that an existing road name may pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the mayor and council on its own motion may change such roadway name after notice is given and a public hearing is held. 
a.  Notice of the proposed change and hearing date shall be given at least 25 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to the scheduled date of the mayor and council hearing on the proposed change. 
b.  The department shall post a sign at approximately one mile intervals throughout the length of the roadway for which a name change is proposed and shall give notice by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of Sandy Springs) of each property which bears an address on the roadway for which a name change is proposed. 
c.  Such signs and notices shall contain the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing, as well as a statement of the beginning and ending points of the segment of the roadway for which the name change is proposed. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the signs are removed or mail is not delivered. 
2.  Where the Mayor and Council, upon recommendation from the director of the department, determines that the existing address numbering on a particular roadway poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the mayor and council may change such address numbering after notice. 
a.  Notice of the change shall be given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of the city) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
b.  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
c.  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the mayor and council. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
3.  When no more than ten percent of the existing addresses along a public or private roadway are deemed to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the director may approve the change of such address numbering after notice is given by regular mail to the owners (according to the tax records of the city) of each property that bears an address on the roadway for which an address numbering change will occur. 
a.  Such notice shall contain the existing full address, the new address, the reason for the change, and the effective date of the change. 
b.  These changes shall be considered effective at the time of the approval by the director, and shall be presented for ratification to the mayor and council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
c.  The effective date shall be no less than 30 or no more than 60 days following the date on which the matter is scheduled for decision by the mayor and council. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if mail is not delivered. 
d.  No name of any commercial, office, industrial or residential development or subdivision shall be changed unless a request for such a change is first submitted to and approved by the department. In determining the acceptability of such a name change, the department shall seek to avoid confusion from similarly named developments. 
e.  Roadway and thoroughfare designation suffixes. Any suffix accepted within the standards of the United States Postal Service, reflected in part in the lists provided by the National Emergency Number Association (NENA), shall be acceptable for naming roadways and thoroughfares within the city. The following are examples of the most commonly used permitted suffixes in the naming of private and public roadways: 
1.  Avenue (to be abbreviated "Ave") 
2.  Bend (to be abbreviated "Bnd") 
3.  Boulevard (to be abbreviated "Blvd") 
4.  Circle (to be abbreviated "Cir") 
5.  Court (to be abbreviated "Ct") 
6.  Cove (to be abbreviated "Cv") 
7.  Drive (to be abbreviated "Dr") 
8.  Grove (to be abbreviated "Grv") 
9.  Hall (no abbreviation) 
10.  Highway (to be abbreviated "Hwy") 
11.  Hill (to be abbreviated "Hl") 
12.  Lane (to be abbreviated "Ln") 
13.  Loop (no abbreviation) 
14.  Parkway (to be abbreviated ("Pkwy") 
15.  Pass (no abbreviation) 
16.  Place (to be abbreviated ("Pl") 
17.  Point (to be abbreviated "Pt") 
18.  Ridge (to be abbreviated "Rdg") 
19.  Road (to be abbreviated "Rd") 
20.  Square (to be abbreviated "Sq") 
21.  Street (to be abbreviated "St") 
22.  Terrace (to be abbreviated "Ter") 
23.  Trace (to be abbreviated "Trce") 
24.  Trail (to be abbreviated "Trl") 
25.  View (to be abbreviated "Vw") 
26.  Walk (no abbreviation) 
27.  Way (no abbreviation) 
H.  Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan Specifications   
1.  A tree preservation/replacement plan shall be required and prepared in accordance with the Development Code and may be combined with other plans such as a general landscaping plan for the project. 
2.  See Section 1 for further specifications. 
I.  Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications   
1.  A buffer and landscape plan shall be required as described in the Development Code and Section 1 of the Technical Manual. 
SECTION 13 - TRAFFIC STUDY STANDARDS AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Traffic Impact Studies. This section applies to any proposed site plan or subdivision plan required to submit traffic impact study and those generating 100 or more trips in the peak hour. A focused traffic study shall be required for any development that involves a drive-thru, queuing, modifications to existing access points, removing/adding access points, changing the type of traffic control at a location, or other special circumstances, unless otherwise determined by the Director. Where conflicts between this Technical Manual and the Development Code exist, the Development Code shall govern.   
B.  Scope. The scope of the traffic impact study shall be established by the Director. Prior to beginning a traffic study, a Letter of Understanding must be drafted by the developer and agreed upon by the Director. It shall outline the study's intent, minimum scope, methodology, and any stipulations. Additional expectations of the Study may be required while it is underway, submitted, or under review. Once the Traffic Study has been accepted by the City, no further changes will be required unless the scope, size, function, or design of the project changes. The changes may be addressed through an addendum or modification of the original Study, per the discretion of the Director. No traffic study will be accepted without a Letter of Understanding.   
C.  Submittal Requirements. Traffic impact studies should be organized as follows:   
1.  Introduction. This would include land use, site, and study boundaries; existing and proposed site uses; existing and proposed uses in the vicinity of the site; and the existing and proposed roadways and intersections. All of these sections should have maps as appropriate. 
2.  Existing traffic volumes. This would involve the collection of peak hour turn movement volumes at the adjacent and impacted intersections as designated by the public works department. Traffic engineering consultants should coordinate with the public works department prior to commissioning studies so that all the intersections can be identified in advance. 
3.  Trip distribution. Develop trip distribution in conformance with the guidelines set forth in the Trip Generation Handbook and provide a figure and a verbal description of the methodology. 
4.  Trip generation. All trip generation should be calculated using the most recent edition of ITE's Trip Generation Manual. The methodology used for the trip generation, as well as the pass-by and internal capture reductions, should conform to the guidelines set forth in ITE's Trip Generation Handbook. Maximum pass-by and internal capture reductions will conform to those set by GRTA and ARC with the DRI process. Provide justification for any trip reductions due to alternate modes. Provide a figure showing the site-generated a.m., p.m., and any other peak volumes on the same map. 
5.  Proposed traffic volumes. Provide a figure showing the existing plus the site-generated a.m., p.m., and any other peak volumes on the same map. Include any background growth factors as appropriate. A chart and figure must be provided showing proposed traffic volumes with and without background growth rates. 
6.  Capacity analysis. Provide existing and proposed levels of service for the roadways and intersections in the study area. 
7.  Safety and Crash analysis (if requested). Provide historic crashes in the vicinity along with collision diagrams and summary of identified trends. 
8.  Parking study (if applicable). Provide justification for requested parking size, typically in the form of a parking analysis, utilization, and/or accumulation study. A shared parking analysis may be required if shared parking is proposed. 
9.  Queuing analysis (if applicable). Provide analysis showing that the proposed queues will not interfere with traffic operations or pose a safety concern. 
10.  Recommendations. Provide a list of all proposed improvements, provide sketches, and justify whether they are project or system improvements. 
11.  Additional items. Additional items may be required based on the type of project being analyzed, the location, surrounding land use and other considerations such as: Circulation Analysis, ADA Accessibility Analysis, Multimodal Analysis, Cut Through Traffic Analysis, Weaving Analysis, Signal Warrant Analysis, Intersection Control Evaluation, etc. 
12.  Appendices should be provided containing all the calculations and traffic data in the formats. Appendices may be provided in electronic format only (no hard copy required) on a CD-ROM labeled appropriately for the study. 
D.  Travel Demand Management. A Travel Demand Management Strategy shall be required of any development based on the results of the Traffic Impact Study. This may also include stipulations for continual performance monitoring and reporting.   
SECTION 14 - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
A.  Mid Block LED Standard With Final   
B.  Reserved   
C.  Intersection Complete Alt Pole   
CLASS "B" CONCRETE 
FC 301 
FC 302 
FC 303 
FC 304 
FC 307 
FC 308 
FC 309 
FC 310 
FC 311 
COSS MARKUPS OF FULTON DETAILS (WILL BE EDITED ACCORDINGLY) 
GDOT 1033D 
GDOT 1034D 
GDOT 1401 
GDOT 9031L 
GDOT 9032B 
GDOT A-1 
GDOT A-2 
GDOT A-3 
GDOT A-4 
GDOT T11A 
GDOT T12B 
GDOT T13A 
GDOT T13B 
GDOT T13C 
GDTO T15A 
GDOT T15C 
GDOT T16 
GDOT T16A 











Section 500-Concrete Structures  _____ 
Table 1—Concrete Mix Table 

 

 
Section 500-Concrete Structures  _____ 
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans, the cost of steel joints and metal bearing assemblies used in structures where there is no structural steel Pay Item are included in the Contract Price for superstructure concrete. 
D.  Retaining Wall Incidentals Retaining wall incidentals will be measured for payment as follows: 
1.  Drainage Systems 
Drainage items required by Special Plans are measured for payment by the unit specified on the Plans only when they are set up as specific Pay Items and are paid for separately. Otherwise, their costs are included in the Contract Price for concrete. 
Payment is full compensation for the costs of excavation and backfill necessary to place the drainage items required by Special Plans. 
The following are not measured for separate payment. Costs are included in the Contract Price for concrete. 
• Sand blankets 
• Crushed or broken stone 
• Weep holes 
2.  Miscellaneous 
The following are not measured for separate payment. Costs are included in the Contract Price for concrete. 
• Expansion material 
• Rubber or polyvinyl plastic water stops 
E.  Utility Installation Hardware The cost of placing utility hardware items is included in the Contract Price for the class of concrete the items are placed in. 
500.5 Payment 
This Work will be paid for at the Contract Price per cubic yard (meter), per Lump Sum, or per linear foot (meter), each complete in place and accepted. 
Payment is full compensation for all things, including incidentals, and direct and indirect costs, to complete the Work. 
Payment will be made under: 

 



























SECTION 15 - ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES AND CHECKLISTS 

MINOR LAND DISTURBANCE CHECKLIST 

_____ 

 

MAJOR LAND DISTURBANCE CHECKLIST 

_____ 

 
  
Stormwater Management Report Contents 
1.  Existing Conditions Analysis 
A.  Provide topographic map of existing conditions. Show the following on the map: 
i.  Delineate drainage boundaries (including offsite areas draining onto site) and label/name each drainage area the same as each basin is labeled/named in calculations and tabulations appearing elsewhere in the report. 
ii.  Indicate acreage of each delineated drainage area. 
iii.  Indicate CN for each delineated drainage area. 
iv.  Indicate t c for each delineated drainage area. 
v.  Indicate runoff travel path and correlate to calculations determining t c for each drainage area. 
vi.  Indicate land cover condition for each drainage area. 
B.  Provide a summary table of peak rates of runoff from each delineated drainage area for 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 100 year storm events. Include in summary table for each drainage area the following data: label/name of drainage area, acreage, CN , t c , gross rainfall amount for each storm event, and peak flow rate for each storm event (cfs). 
C.  Provide time of concentration determination calculations for each drainage area. 
2.  Post Development Conditions Analysis 
A.  Provide topographic map of developed conditions. Show the following on the map: 
i.  Delineate drainage boundaries (including offsite areas draining onto site) and label/name each drainage area the same as each basin is labeled/named in calculations and tabulations appearing elsewhere in the report. 
ii.  Indicate acreage of each delineated drainage area. 
iii.  Indicate CN for each delineated drainage area. 
iv.  Indicate t c for each delineated drainage area. 
v.  Indicate runoff travel path and correlate to calculations determining t c for each drainage area. 
vi.  Indicate land cover condition for each drainage area. 
vii.  Delineate and label/name each stormwater management facility. 
viii.  Indicate all outflow locations for each stormwater management facility. 
B.  Provide a summary table of peak rates of runoff from each delineated drainage area for 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 100 year storm events. Include in summary table for each drainage area the following data: label/name of drainage area, acreage, CN, t c , gross rainfall amount for each storm event, and peak flow rate for each storm event (cfs). 
C.  Provide a summary table of developed peak rates of runoff vs. existing peak rates of runoff for each drainage area. Demonstrate no increase in peak rates of runoff for 1, 2, 5, 10, or 25 year events for each drainage area. 
D.  Provide tabular hydrograph output for drainage area(s) draining to each stormwater management facility for the 1,2, 5, 10, 25, and 100 year events. 
E.  Provide tabular hydrograph output for outflow (routing) of each stormwater management facility for the 1,2,5,10, 25, and 100 year events. 
F.  For any bypass area hydrograph that is combined with a stormwater management facility outflow hydrograph, provide the tabular hydrograph output for the bypass area for the 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 100 year events. Provide the tabular hydrograph output for each combined hydrograph. 
G.  Provide time of concentration determination calculations for each drainage area. 
H.  For each stormwater management facility provide Stage/Storage/Outflow tabulation and outlet configuration data used for routing for each stormwater management facility. 
I.  Provide Water Quality Volume (WQv) calculations in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). 
J.  Provide Channel Protection Volume (CPv) calculations in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). 
K.  Provide extended detention orifice sizing calculation. 
L.  Provide details for outlet control structures/devices for each stormwater management facility on plans and in stormwater management report. Ensure details on plans agree with details in report. Label structures so plans and details in report and on plan can be easily correlated. 
3.  Post Development Downstream Analysis 
A.  Provide analysis of downstream conditions at each point or area along project boundary at which runoff will exit the property. 
B.  Extend analysis of downstream conditions to include all portions of the downstream conveyances between the site and the point where the site area is 10 percent of the total basin area. 
C.  Compare capacity vs. designed flows for each downstream conveyance between site and 10% point. 
4.  Minimum Hydrology Design Parameters 
A.  Existing condition, pervious vegetated areas maximum CN = 55. 
B.  Existing condition time of concentration determination shall be in accordance with Section 2.1.5.6 in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). Sheet/Overland flow lengths less than 100 feet used in GSMM equation 2.1.9 shall be justified in stormwater management report. Use of existing time of concentrations greater than calculated in accordance with GSMM 2.1.5.6 is acceptable. 
C.  Minimum freeboard for above ground earthen stormwater management facility dams is 2 feet. 
D.  Minimum freeboard for concrete stormwater management containment facility is 1 foot. 
  
Other Hydrology and Drainage Items 
1.  Show a 20 ft. graded (max 16% slope) and stabilized access easement to all stormwater management facilities from a location of public vehicle access. 
2.  Provide a 20 ft landscape strip as required by the City Arborist around the exterior of all Detention areas adjacent to and outside the required 10 ft. access easement. 
3.  Show a six foot high security fence with a 10 ft. access gate outside of the ten foot access easement around each detention pond. Show the location of the access gate. 
4.  Provide Standard 908 Detail for Earth Fill for Detention Ponds or other detail that meets the minimum standards inherent in standard 908. 
5.  State the Water Quality Volume, the Channel Protection Volume, the 25-year volume, and the 100-year volume on the plans. State the Water Quality elevation, the Channel Protection elevation, the 25-year elevation and the 100 year elevation on the plans. 
6.  Eliminate proposed concentrated discharge from site where existing condition is sheet flow. 
7.  When serving more than three lots, detention ponds shall be located on a separate parcel Where no home can be constructed. 
8.  Provide design professional seal and signature on plans and report. 
  
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement (Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances Chap. 14, Art. 5, 3.d) 
1.  An Inspection and Maintenance Agreement for all stormwater management facilities must be approved by the Community Development Department before permitting. 
2.  State name or official title of person(s) responsible for carrying out inspection and maintenance. 
3.  Responsibility shall remain with property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. 
4.  Include schedule for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur. 
5.  Include plans for annual inspections and include remedies for default. 
6.  Agreement shall be recorded before final plat approval for residential developments and before certificate of occupancy for other developments. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
This table gives the location within the Technical Manual of those ordinances adopted since August 15, 2017, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the Technical Manual. Ordinances adopted and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 